<h2 class="c009">BOOK ONE</h2>
</div>
<div class="c012"><span class="c004">JÖRUNDGAARD</span></div>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c006"/>
</div>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_3">3</span>
<h3 class="c013">1</h3>
</div>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">WHEN the lands and goods of Ivar Gjesling the
younger, of Sundbu, were divided after his
death in 1306, his lands in Sil of Gudbrandsdal
fell to his daughter Ragnfrid and her husband Lavrans
Björgulfsön. Up to then they had lived on Lavrans’
manor of Skog at Follo near Oslo; but now they moved up
to Jörundgaard at the top of the open lands of Sil.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was of the stock that was known in this country
as the Lagmandssons. It had come here from Sweden with
that Laurentius, Lagmand of East Gotland, who took the
Belbo Jarl’s sister, the Lady Bengta, out of Vreta convent,
and carried her off to Norway. Sir Laurentius lived at the
Court of King Haakon the Old, and won great favour with
the King, who gave him the Skog manor. But when he had
been in the country about eight years he died in his bed,
and his widow, who belonged to the Folkunga kindred, and
had the name of a King’s daughter among the Norwegians,
went home and made matters up with her relations. Afterwards
she made a rich marriage in another land. She and
Sir Laurentius had no children, so the heritage of Skog fell
to Laurentius’ brother, Ketil. He was father’s father to
Lavrans Björgulfsön.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was married very young; he was three years
younger than his wife, and was only twenty-eight when he
came to Sil. As a youth he had been in the King’s bodyguard
and had enjoyed a good upbringing; but after his
marriage he lived a quiet life on his estate, for Ragnfrid
was something strange and heavy of mood, and seemed not
at home among the people of the south. After she had had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_4">4</span>the ill-hap to lose three little sons, one after the other, in
the cradle, she grew yet more shy of people. Thus it was
in part to bring his wife nearer to her kinsfolk and old acquaintance
that Lavrans moved to Gudbrandsdalen. When
they came there, they brought with them the one child that
was left, a little maid called Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">But when they had settled at Jörundgaard they lived for
the most part just as quietly there, keeping very much to
themselves; it seemed as though Ragnfrid did not care
much for her kindred, for she saw them no oftener than
seemly use and wont required. This was in part because
Lavrans and Ragnfrid were more than commonly pious
and God-fearing folk, diligent in church-going, and always
pleased to give harbour to God’s servants, to messengers
sent on the Church’s errands, or to pilgrims on their way
up the valley to Nidaros; and showing the greatest honour
to their parish-priest—who was also their nearest neighbour,
living at Romundgaard. Other folk in the valley
were rather given to think that the Church cost them quite
dear enough in tithes and in goods and money; and that
there was no need to fast and pray so hard besides, or to
bring priests and monks into their houses, unless at times
when they were really needed.</p>
<p class="c015">Otherwise the Jörundgaard folk were much looked up to,
and well-liked too; most of all Lavrans, for he was known
as a strong man and a bold, but peace-loving, quiet and upright,
plain in his living but courteous and seemly in his
ways, a rarely good husbandman and a mighty hunter—’twas
wolves and bears and all kinds of harmful beasts he
hunted most keenly. In a few years he had gotten much
land into his hands; but he was a good and helpful landlord
to his tenants.</p>
<p class="c015">Folk saw so little of Ragnfrid that they soon gave up
talking much about her. In the first time after she came
back to the valley many people had wondered, for they
remembered her as she had been at her home at Sundbu
<span class="pageno" id="Page_5">5</span>in her youth. Beautiful she had never been, but she had
looked kind and happy; now she had fallen off so that
you might well believe she was ten years older than her
husband, and not only three. Most folk deemed she took
the loss of her children harder than was reason, for but
for this she was better off in every way than most wives—she
lived in great plenty and in high esteem, and things
were well between her and her husband, so far as people
could see; Lavrans did not go after other women, he took
counsel with her in all affairs, and, sober or drunk, he
never said a harsh word to her. Besides she was not so
old but she might yet bear many children, if it were God’s
pleasure.</p>
<p class="c015">It was somewhat hard for them to get young folks to take
service at Jörundgaard, the mistress being thus heavy of
mood and all the fasts so strictly kept. Otherwise it was
a good house to serve in; hard words and punishments
were little in use; and both Lavrans and Ragnfrid took the
lead in all the work. The master, indeed, was glad of
mood in his own way, and would join in a dance or lead
the singing when the young folk held their games on the
Church-green on vigil nights. But still it was mostly
older folks who came and took service at Jörundgaard;
these liked the place well and stayed there long.</p>
<p class="c015">When the child Kristin was seven years old, it so fell out
one time that she got leave to go with her father up to their
mountain sæter.</p>
<p class="c015">It was a fine morning, a little way on in the summer,
Kristin was in the loft-room, where they were sleeping now
summer had come; she saw the sun shining outside and
heard her father and his men talking in the courtyard below—and
she was so joyful that she could not stand still
while her mother put on her clothes, but hopped and
jumped about as each piece of clothing was put on her.
She had never been up in the mountains before; only
across the pass to Vaage, when she was taken to visit her
<span class="pageno" id="Page_6">6</span>mother’s kinsfolk at Sundbu, and sometimes to the woods
near by the manor with her mother and the house-folk,
when they went out to pluck berries for Ragnfrid to mix
with the small beer, or to make into sour paste of cranberries
and cowberries that she ate on her bread in Lent
instead of butter.</p>
<p class="c015">The mother twisted up Kristin’s long yellow hair and
tied it into her old blue cap, then kissed her daughter on
the cheek, and Kristin sprang away and down to her
father. Lavrans was in the saddle already; he lifted her
up behind him and seated her on his cloak, which he had
folded up and placed on the horse’s loins for a pillion.
Kristin had to sit there astride and hold on to his belt.
They called out “Goodbye” to Ragnfrid; but she came running
down from the balcony with Kristin’s hooded cape—she
handed it to Lavrans and bade him look well to
the child.</p>
<p class="c015">The sun shone, but it had rained much in the night,
so that everywhere the becks came rushing and singing
down the grassy slopes, and wreaths of mist clung and
drifted under the mountain sides. But over the hill-crest
white fair-weather clouds were swelling up in the blue
air, and Lavrans and his men said among themselves that
it was like to be hot as the day went on. Lavrans had
four men with him, and they were all well-armed; for
at this time there were many kinds of outlandish people
lying up among the mountains—though a strong party
like this, going but a short way in, was not like to see
or hear aught of such folk. Kristin was fond of all the
men; three of them were men past youth, but the fourth,
Arne Gyrdsön, from Finsbrekken, was a half-grown boy,
and he was Kristin’s best friend; he rode next after Lavrans
and her, for it was he that was to tell her about
all they saw on their road.</p>
<p class="c015">They passed between the Romundgaard houses and
changed greetings with Eirik priest. He was standing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_7">7</span>outside chiding with his daughter—she kept house for
him—about a web of new-dyed cloth that she had hung
out and forgotten the day before; it was all spoilt now
with the night’s rain.</p>
<p class="c015">On the hill behind the parsonage lay the church; it was
not large, but fair and pleasant, well-kept and newly
tarred. By the cross outside the churchyard gate Lavrans
and his men took off their hats and bowed their heads;
then the father turned in the saddle, and he and Kristin
waved to Ragnfrid, whom they could see down below at
home standing out on the sward by the houses; she waved
back to them with the full of her linen head-dress.</p>
<p class="c015">Up here on the church-green and in the church yard
Kristin was used to come and play near every day but to-day,
when she was setting out to go so far, the sight she
knew so well—home and all the parish round it—seemed
new and strange to the child. The clusters of houses at
Jörundgaard looked, as it were, smaller and greyer, lying
there down on the flats, courtyard and farmyard. The
river wound shining on its way, the valley spread far
with broad green meadows and marshes in its bottom and
farms with ploughland and pasture stretched up the hillsides
under the grey and headlong mountain walls.</p>
<p class="c015">Far below, where the mountains came together and closed
the valley, Kristin knew that Loptsgaard lay. There lived
Sigurd and Jon, two old men with white beards; they were
always for playing and making merry with her when
they came to Jörundgaard. She was fond of Jon, for he
would carve out the fairest beasts in wood for her, and
once she had had a gold finger-ring of him; nay, the last
time he came to them, at Whitsuntide, he had brought her
a knight so sweetly carved and coloured so fairly that
Kristin thought she had never had so fine a gift. She
must needs take the knight to bed with her every single
night; but when she woke in the morning he was always
standing on the step in front of the bed she lay in with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_8">8</span>her father and mother. Her father said the knight jumped
up at the first cockcrow; but Kristin knew well enough
that, after she had fallen asleep, her mother took him
away, for she heard her say that he was so hard, and
hurt so if he got underneath them in the night.—Sigurd
of Loptsgaard Kristin was afraid of, and she did not like
him to take her on his knees; for he used to say that when
she grew up he meant to sleep in her arms. He had outlived
two wives, and he said himself he was sure to outlive
the third; and then Kristin could be the fourth. But
when she began to cry at this, Lavrans laughed and said
he had no fear that Morgit would give up the ghost so
speedily; but if the worst came to pass and Sigurd should
come a-wooing, let Kristin have no fear—he should have
No for his answer.</p>
<p class="c015">A bowshot or so north of the church there lay by the
roadside a great block of stone, and around it a thick
small grove of birch and aspen. Here the children were
wont to play at church, and Tomas, the youngest son of
Eirik priest’s daughter, stood up in the person of his grandfather
and said mass, sprinkled holy-water, and even baptized,
when there was rain-water in the hollows of the
rock. But once, the autumn before, this game had fallen
out but sadly for them. For first Tomas had married Kristin
and Arne—Arne was not so old but he would go off and
play with the children when he saw a chance. Then Arne
caught a baby pig that was going by, and they brought it
into church to be baptized. Tomas anointed it with
mud, dipped it into a pool of water, and, copying his grandfather,
said mass in Latin and chid them for the smallness
of their offerings—and at this the children laughed, for
they had heard their elders talk of Eirik’s exceeding greed
of money. But the more they laughed the worse Tomas
got in the things he hit on: for next he said that this child
had been gotten in Lent, and they must pay penalty for
their sin to the priest and the church. The great boys
<span class="pageno" id="Page_9">9</span>shouted with laughter at this; but Kristin was so ashamed
that she was all but weeping, as she stood there with the
little pig in her arms. And just as this was going on
who must chance to come that way but Eirik himself riding
home from a sick-visit. When he understood what the
young folks were about, he sprang from his horse, and
handed the holy vessels to Bentein, his eldest grandson,
who was with him, so suddenly that Bentein nearly dropped
the silver dove with God’s body in it on the hillside,
while the priest rushed in among the children belabouring
all he could reach. Kristin let slip the little pig, and
it rushed shrieking down the road with the christening
robe trailing after it, while Eirik’s horses reared and
plunged with terror; the priest pushed her too so that
she fell down, and he knocked against her with his foot
so hard that she felt the pain in her hip for many days
after. Lavrans had thought when he heard of this, that
Eirik had been too hard with Kristin, seeing she was but
a little child. He said he would speak to the priest of it,
but Ragnfrid begged him not to do so, for the child had
gotten but what she deserved, for joining in such a blasphemous
game. So Lavrans said no more of the matter;
but he gave Arne the worst beating the boy had ever had.</p>
<p class="c015">So now, as they rode by the stone, Arne plucked Kristin
by the sleeve. He dared not say aught for fear of Lavrans,
but he made a face, then smiled and clapped his hand
to his back. But Kristin bowed her head shamefacedly.</p>
<p class="c015">Their way led on into thick woods. They rode along
under Hammerhill; the valley grew narrow and dark here
and the roar of the river sounded louder and more harsh—when
they caught a glimpse of the Laagen it ran ice-green
and white with foam between walls of rock. The
mountains on either side of the valley were black with forest;
it was dark and narrow and ugly in the gorge, and
there came cold gusts of wind. They rode across the
Rostaa stream by the log-bridge, and soon could see the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_10">10</span>bridge over the great river down the valley. A little below
the bridge was a pool where a kelpy lived. Arne began
to tell Kristin about it, but Lavrans sternly told the
boy to hold his peace in the woods about such things. And
when they came to the bridge he leaped off his horse and
led it across by the bridle, while he held the child
round the waist with his other arm.</p>
<p class="c015">On the other side of the river was a bridle-path leading
steeply up the hillside, so the men got off their horses and
went on foot; but her father lifted Kristin forward into
the saddle, so that she could hold on to the saddle-bow;
and let her ride Guldsveinen all alone.</p>
<p class="c015">Now grey-stone peaks and blue domes flecked with snow
rose above the mountain ridges as they climbed higher up;
and now Kristin saw through the trees glimpses of the parish
north of the gorge, and Arne pointed, and told her the
names of the farms that they could make out down there.</p>
<p class="c015">High up the mountain-side they came to a little croft.
They stopped by the stick fence; Lavrans shouted, and his
voice came back again and again from the mountains round.
Two men came running down, between the small tilled
patches. These were both sons of the house; they were
good men at the tar-burning and Lavrans was for hiring
them to burn some tar for him. Their mother came after
them with a great bowl of cooled milk; for the day was
now grown hot, as the men had foretold.</p>
<p class="c015">“I saw you had your daughter with you,” she said when
she had greeted them, “and methought I must needs have a
sight of her. But you must take the cap from her head;
they say she hath such bonny hair.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans did as the woman asked him, and Kristin’s hair
fell over her shoulders and hung down right to the saddle.
It was thick and yellow like ripe wheat. The woman, Isrid,
took some of it in her hand and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, now I see the word that has gone about concerning
this little maid of yours was nowise too great—a lilyrose
<span class="pageno" id="Page_11">11</span>she is, and looks as should the child of a knightly man.
Mild eyes hath she too—she favours you and not the Gjeslings.
God grant you joy of her, Lavrans Björgulfsön!
And you’re riding on Guldsveinen, as stiff and straight as
a courtier,” she said, laughingly, as she held the bowl for
Kristin to drink.</p>
<p class="c015">The child grew red with pleasure, for she knew well that
her father was held to be the comeliest man far around; he
looked like a knight, standing there among his men, though
his dress was much of the farmer fashion, such as he wore
at home for daily use. He wore a coat of green-dyed wadmal,
somewhat wide and short, open at the throat, so that
the shirt showed beneath. For the rest, his hose and shoes
were of undyed leather, and on his head he had a broad-brimmed
woollen hat of the ancient fashion. For ornaments
he had only a smooth silver buckle to his belt, and a
little silver brooch in his shirt-band; but some links of a
golden neck-chain showed against his neck. Lavrans always
wore this chain, and on it there hung a golden cross
set with great rock-crystals; it was made to open, and inside
there were shreds of the hair and the shroud of the
holy Lady Elin of Skövde, for the Lagmandssons counted
their descent from one of that blessed lady’s daughters.
But when Lavrans was in the woods or out at his work he
was used to thrust the cross in next his bare breast, so that
he might not lose it.</p>
<p class="c015">Yet did he look in his coarse homely clothing more
high-born than many a knight of the King’s household
in his finest banqueting attire. He was stalwart of growth,
tall, broad-shouldered, and small-waisted; his head was
small and sat fairly on his neck, and he had comely features,
somewhat long—cheeks of a seemly fullness, chin
fairly rounded and mouth well shaped. His skin was
light and his face fresh of hue, he had grey eyes and
thick smooth silky-yellow hair.</p>
<p class="c015">He stood there and talked with Isrid of her affairs; and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_12">12</span>asked about Tordis too, a kinswoman of Isrid’s that was
tending the Jörundgaard sæter this summer. Tordis had
just had a child; Isrid was only waiting for the chance of
a safe escort through the woods before taking the boy
down to have him christened. Lavrans said that she had
best come with them up to the sæter; he was coming down
again the next evening, and ’twould be safer and better
for her to have many men to go along with her and the
heathen child.</p>
<p class="c015">Isrid thanked him: “To say truth, ’twas even this I
was waiting for. We know well, we poor folk under the
uplands here, that you will ever do us a kind turn if you
can, when you come hither.” She ran up to the hut to
fetch a bundle and a cloak.</p>
<p class="c015">It was indeed so that Lavrans liked well to come
among these small folk who lived on clearings and lease-holdings
high up on the outskirts of the parish; amongst
them he was always glad and merry. He talked with
them of the ways of the forest beasts and the reindeer of
the upland wastes; and of all the uncanny things that
are stirring in such places. And he stood by them and
helped them with word and deed; saw to their sick cattle;
helped them with their errands to the smith or to the carpenter;
nay, would sometimes take hold himself and bend
his great strength to the work, when the worst stones or
roots were to be broken out of the earth. Therefore
were these people ever glad to greet Lavrans Björgulfsön
and Guldsveinen, the great red stallion that he rode upon.
’Twas a comely beast with a shining skin, white mane
and tail and light eyes—strong and fiery, so that his fame
was spread through all the country round; but with his
master he was gentle as a lamb, and Lavrans used to say
that the horse was dear to him as a younger brother.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans’ first errand was to see to the beacon on Heimhaugen.
For in the hard and troubled times a hundred
years or more gone by, the yeoman of the dales had built
<span class="pageno" id="Page_13">13</span>beacons here and there high up on the fells above them,
like the seamarks in the roadsteads upon the coast. But
these beacons in the uplands were not in the ward of the
King’s levies, but were cared for by the yeomen-guilds,
and the guild-brothers took turns at their tending.</p>
<p class="c015">When they were come to the first sæter, Lavrans turned
out all but the pack-horse to graze there; and now they
took a steep foot-path upwards. Before long the trees grew
thin and scattered. Great firs stood dead and white as
bones upon the marshy grounds—and now Kristin saw
bare, grey-stone peaks rising to the sky on all hands.
They climbed long stretches amid loose stones, and at
times the becks ran in the track, so that her father must
carry her. The wind blew strong and fresh up here and
the ground was black with berries amidst the heather, but
Lavrans said they could not stop now to gather them.
Arne sprang now in front and now behind, plucked berries
for her, and told her whose the sæters were that they
saw below them in the forest—for there was forest over
the whole of Hövringsvangen in those days.</p>
<p class="c015">And now they were close below the highest round bare
top and saw the great pile of timber against the sky, with
the watch-house under the lee of a crag.</p>
<p class="c015">As they came up over the brow the wind rushed against
them and buffeted their clothing—it seemed to Kristin as
though something living, that dwelt up here, met and
greeted them. It blew gustily around her and Arne as
they went forward over the mosses, till they sate them
down far out on a jutting point, and Kristin gazed with
great eyes—never before had she dreamed that the world
was so big and wide.</p>
<p class="c015">Forest-shagged ranges lay below her on all sides; the
valley was but a cleft betwixt the huge fells, and the side-glens
still lesser clefts; there were many such, yet was
there little of dale and much of fell. All around grey
peaks, flaming with golden lichen, rose above the sea of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_14">14</span>forest, and far off, on the very brink of heaven, stood blue
crests flashing here and there with snow, and melting, before
their eyes, into the grey-blue and pure white summer-clouds.
But northeastwards, nearer by—just beyond the
sæter woods—lay a cluster of mighty slate-coloured
domes with streaks of new-fallen snow down their slopes.
These Kristin guessed to be the Boar Fells she had heard
tell of, for they were indeed like naught but a herd of heavy
boar wending inland that had just turned their backs upon
the parish. Yet Arne told her ’twas a half-day’s ride
to get even so far.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had ever thought that could she but win over
the top of the home-fells she would look down upon another
parish like their own, with tilled farms and dwellings,
and ’twas great wonder to her now to see how far it
was betwixt the places where folks dwelt. She saw the
small yellow and green flecks down below in the dale-bottom,
and the tiny clearings with their grey dots of
houses amid the hill forests; she began to take tale of
them, but when she had reckoned three times twelve, she
could keep count of them no longer. Yet the human
dwelling-places were as nothing in that waste.</p>
<p class="c015">She knew that in the wild woods wolves and bears lorded
it, and that under every stone there dwelt trolls and
goblins and elfinfolk, and she was afraid, for no one
knew the number of them, but there must be many times
more of them than of Christian men and women. Then
she called aloud on her father, but he could not hear, for
the blowing of the wind—he and his men were busy rolling
heavy stones up the bare mountain top to pile round
the timbers of the beacon.</p>
<p class="c015">But Isrid came to the children and showed Kristin where
the fell west of Vaage lay. And Arne pointed out the
Grayfell, where folk from the parish took reindeer in pits,
and where the King’s falcon-catchers lay in stone huts.
That was a trade Arne thought to take to some day—but
<span class="pageno" id="Page_15">15</span>if he did he would learn as well to train the birds for the
chase—and he held his arms aloft as though to cast a
hawk.</p>
<p class="c015">Isrid shook her head.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis a hard and evil life, that, Arne Gyrdsön—’twould
be a heavy sorrow for your mother, boy, should you ever
come to be a falcon-catcher. None may earn his bread
in those wild hills except he join in fellowship with the
worst of men—aye, and with them that are worse still.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans had come toward them and had heard this
last word: “Aye,” says he, “there’s more than one hide
of land in there that pays neither tax nor tithe—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Yes, many a thing must you have seen,” said Isrid
coaxingly, “you who fare so far afield—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, aye,” said Lavrans slowly. “Maybe—but methinks
’tis well not to speak of such things overmuch.
One should not, I say, grudge folks who have lost their
peace in the parish, whatever peace they can find among
the fells. Yet have I seen yellow fields and brave meadows
where few folk know that such things be, and herds
have I seen of cattle and small stock, but of these I know
not whether they belonged to mankind or to other
folk—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh! aye,” says Isrid. “Bears and wolves get the blame
for the beasts that are missed from the sæters here, but
there are worse thieves among the fells than they.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Do you call them worse?” asked Lavrans thoughtfully,
stroking his daughter’s cap. “In the hills to the south
under the Boar Fells I once saw three little lads, and the
greatest was even as Kristin here—yellow hair they had,
and coats of skin. They gnashed their teeth at me like
wolf-cubs before they ran to hide. ’Twere little wonder
if the poor man who owned them were fain to lift a cow
or two—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh! both wolves and bears have young,” says Isrid
testily. “And you spare not them, Lavrans, neither them
<span class="pageno" id="Page_16">16</span>nor their young. Yet they have no lore of law nor of
Christendom, as have these evil-doers you wish so well
to—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you I wish them too well, because I wish them
a little better than the worst?” said Lavrans, smiling a
little. “But come now, let us see what cheer Ragnfrid
has sent with us to-day.” He took Kristin by the hand
and led her with him. And as they went he bent and said
softly: “I thought of your three small brothers, little
Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">They peeped into the watch-house, but it was close in
there and smelt of mould. Kristin took a look around,
but there were only some earthen benches about the walls,
a hearth-stone in the middle of the floor, and some barrels
of tar and faggots of pine-roots and birch-bark.
Lavrans thought ’twould be best they should eat without
doors, and a little way down among the birches they
found a fine piece of green-sward.</p>
<p class="c015">The pack-horse was unloaded, and they stretched themselves
upon the grass. In the wallets Ragnfrid had given
them was plenty food of the best—soft bread and bannocks,
butter and cheese, pork and wind-dried reindeer
meat, lard, boiled brisket of beef, two kegs with German
beer, and of mead a little jar. The carving of the meat
and portioning it round went quickly, while Halvdan, the
oldest of the men, struck fire and made a blaze—it was
safer to have a good fire out here in the woods.</p>
<p class="c015">Isrid and Arne gathered heather and dwarf-birch and
cast it on the blaze. It crackled as the fire tore the fresh
green from the twigs, and small white flakes flew high
upon the wisps of red flame; the smoke whirled thick
and black toward the clear sky. Kristin sat and watched;
it seemed to her the fire was glad that it was out there,
and free, and could play and frisk. ’Twas otherwise than
when, at home, it sat upon the hearth and must work at
cooking food and giving light to the folks in the room.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_17">17</span>She sat nestled by her father with one arm upon his
knee; he gave her all she would have of the best, and
bade her drink her fill of the beer and taste well of the
mead.</p>
<p class="c015">“She will be so tipsy she’ll never get down to the sæter
on her feet,” said Halvdan, laughing, but Lavrans stroked
her round cheeks:</p>
<p class="c015">“Then here are folk enough who can bear her—it will
do her good—drink you too, Arne—God’s gifts do good,
not harm, to you that are yet growing—make sweet, red
blood, and give deep sleep, and rouse not madness and
folly—”</p>
<p class="c015">The men too drank often and deep; neither was Isrid
backward. And soon their voices and the roar and crackle
of the fire were but a far off hubbub in Kristin’s ears,
and she began to grow heavy of head. She was still
aware how they questioned Lavrans and would have him
tell of the strange things he had met with when out
a-hunting. But much he would not say; and this seemed
to her so good and so safe—and then she had eaten so
well.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father had a slice of soft barley-bread in his hands;
he pinched small bits of it between his fingers into shapes
of horses, and cutting shreds of meat, he set these astride
the steeds and made them ride over his thigh and into
Kristin’s mouth. But soon she was so weary she could
neither open her mouth nor chew—and so she sank back
upon the ground and slept.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">When she came to herself again, she was lying in a
warm darkness within her father’s arm—he had wrapped
his cloak about them both. Kristin sat up, wiped the
moisture from her face, and unloosed her cap that the air
might dry her damp locks.</p>
<p class="c015">The day was surely far spent, for the sunlight was golden,
and the shadows had lengthened and fell now toward
<span class="pageno" id="Page_18">18</span>the southeast. No breath of wind was stirring, and gnats
and flies buzzed and swarmed about the group of sleeping
men. Kristin sat stock still, scratched her gnat-bitten
hands and gazed about her—the mountain-top above them
shone white with moss and golden with lichen in the sunshine,
and the pile of weather-beaten timber stood against
the sky like the skeleton of some wondrous beast.</p>
<p class="c015">She grew ill at ease—it was so strange to see them all
sleeping there in the naked daylight. At home if by
hap she woke at night, she lay snug in the dark with her
mother on the one side and on the other the tapestry
stretched upon the wall. And then she knew that the
chamber with its smoke-vent was shut and barred against
the night and the weather without, and sounds of slumber
came from the folk who lay soft and safe on the pillows
twixt the skins. But all these bodies, lying twisted and
bent on the hillside, about the little heap of black and
white ashes, might well be dead—some lay upon their
faces, some upon their backs with knees updrawn, and
the noises that came from them scared her. Her father
snored deeply, but when Halvdan drew a breath, it piped
and whistled in his nose. And Arne lay upon his side,
his face hidden on his arm, and his glossy, light-brown
hair spread out amongst the heather; he lay so still Kristin
grew afraid lest he be dead. She had to bend forward
and touch him—and on this he turned a little in his sleep.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin suddenly bethought her, maybe they had slept
through the night and this was the next day—and this
frightened her so that she shook her father; but he only
grunted and slept on. Kristin herself was still heavy of
head, but she dared not lie down to sleep again. And so
she crept forward to the fire and raked in it with a stick—there
were still some embers aglow beneath. She threw
upon it heather and small twigs which she broke off round
about her—she dared not pass the ring of sleepers to find
bigger branches.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_19">19</span>There came a rattling and crashing in the woods near
by, and Kristin’s heart sank and she went cold with fear.
But then she spied a red shape amidst the trees, and Guldsveinen
broke out of the thicket. He stood there and
gazed upon her with his clear, bright eyes. She was so
glad to see him, she leapt to her feet and ran to the stallion.
And there, too, was the brown horse Arne had ridden,
and the pack-horse as well. Now she felt safe and
happy again; she went and patted them all three upon
their flanks, but Guldsveinen bent his head so that she could
reach up to fondle his cheeks, and pull his yellow-white
forelock, while he nosed round her hands with his soft
muzzle.</p>
<p class="c015">The horses wandered, feeding, down the birch-grown
slope, and Kristin went with them—she felt there was
naught to fear so long as she kept close to Guldsveinen—he
had driven off a bear before now, she knew. And the
bilberries grew so thick in here, and the child was thirsty
now, with a bad taste in her mouth; the beer was not to
her liking any more, but the sweet, juicy berries were good
as wine. Away, on a scree, she saw raspberries growing
too—so she grasped Guldsveinen by the mane, and sweetly
bade him go there with her, and the stallion followed willingly
with the little maid. Thus, as she wandered further
and further down the hillside, he followed her when she
called, and the other two horses followed Guldsveinen.</p>
<p class="c015">Somewhere near at hand she heard the gurgling and
trickling of a beck; she followed the sound till she found
it, and then lay out upon a great slab and washed her hot,
gnat-bitten face and hands. Below the slab the water
stood, a still, black pool, for over against it there rose
a wall of rock behind some small birches and willows—it
made the finest of mirrors, and Kristin leaned over and
looked at herself in the water, for she wished to see
whether ’twas true, as Isrid said, that she bore a likeness
to her father.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_20">20</span>She smiled and nodded and bent forward till her hair
met the bright hair about the round, great-eyed child-face
she saw in the beck.</p>
<p class="c015">Round about grew a great plenty of those gay, pink
flower-clusters they name valerian—redder far and finer
here by the fell-beck than at home by the river. Of
these Kristin plucked and bound them about with grass,
till she had woven herself the finest, thickest wreath of
rose-pink. The child pressed it down on her head and ran
to the pool to see how she looked now she was decked out
like a grown maid who goes a dancing.</p>
<p class="c015">She stooped over the water and saw her own dark image
rise from the bottom and grow clearer as it came to
meet her—and then in the mirror of the pool she saw another
figure standing among the birches opposite and bending
toward her. In haste she got upon her knees and
gazed across. At first she thought it was but the rock
and the bushes clinging round its foot. But all at once
she was aware of a face amid the leaves—there stood a
lady, pale, with waving, flaxen hair—the great, light-grey
eyes and wide, pink nostrils were like Guldsveinen’s.
She was clad in something light, leaf-green, and branches
and twigs hid her up to the broad breasts which were
covered over with brooches and sparkling chains.</p>
<p class="c015">The little girl gazed upon the figure; and as she gazed
the lady raised a hand and showed her a wreath of golden
flowers;—she beckoned with it.</p>
<p class="c015">Behind her Kristin heard Guldsveinen neigh loud in
fear—she turned her head—the stallion reared, screaming
till the echoes rang, then flung around and fled up the
hill with a thunder of hoofs. The other horses followed—straight
up the scree, while stones came rumbling down
and boughs and roots broke and rattled.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Kristin screamed aloud. “Father,” she shrieked,
“father!” She gained her feet, tore after the horses and
dared not look behind. She clambered up the scree, trod
<span class="pageno" id="Page_21">21</span>on the hem of her dress and slipped back downwards;
climbed again, catching at the stones with bleeding hands,
creeping on sore bruised knees, and crying now to Guldsveinen,
now to her father—sweat started from every pore
of her body and ran like water into her eyes, and her heart
beat as though ’twould break against her ribs; while sobs
of terror choked her throat:</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh father, oh father!”</p>
<p class="c015">Then his voice sounded somewhere above: she saw him
come with great bounds down the scree—the bright, sunlit
scree; birch and aspen stood along it and blinked from
their small silvered leaves—the hillside was so quiet, so
bright, while her father came leaping, calling her by
name; and Kristin sank down and knew that now she was
saved.</p>
<p class="c015">“Sancta Maria!” Lavrans knelt and clasped his daughter—he
was pale and strange about the mouth, so that
Kristin grew yet more afraid; ’twas as though only now
in his face she read how great had been her peril.</p>
<p class="c015">“Child, child,—” he lifted her bleeding hands, looked
at them, saw the wreath upon her bare head, and touched
it. “What is it—how came you hither, my little Kristin—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I went with Guldsveinen,” she sobbed upon his breast.
“I got so afraid seeing you all asleep, but then Guldsveinen
came—and then there was someone by the beck
down yonder that beckoned me—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Who beckoned—was it a man?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No, ’twas a lady—she beckoned with a wreath of
gold—I think ’twas the dwarf-maiden, father—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus Kristus,” said Lavrans softly, and crossed himself
and the child.</p>
<p class="c015">He helped her up the scree till they came to a grassy
slope; then he lifted and bore her. She clung about his
neck and sobbed—could not stop for all his soothing.</p>
<p class="c015">Soon they met the men and Isrid. The woman smote
<span class="pageno" id="Page_22">22</span>her hands together, when she heard what had befallen:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, ’twas the Elf-maiden sure enough—she would
have lured the fair child into the mountain, trust you me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Hold your peace,” bade Lavrans sternly. “Never
should we have talked of such things here in the woods
as we did—one knows not what may lie beneath the rocks
and hearken to each word.”</p>
<p class="c015">He drew the golden chain from out his shirt and hung
it and the relic-holding cross about Kristin’s neck and
thrust them in upon her bare body.</p>
<p class="c015">“But see to it, all of you,” he said, “that you watch
well your mouths, so Ragnfrid may never know the child
has been in such peril.”</p>
<p class="c015">Then they caught the three horses, which had made off
into the woods, and went quickly down to the pasture
where the other horses were grazing. There they all
mounted and rode to the Jörundgaard sæter; it was no
great way.</p>
<p class="c015">The sun was near setting when they came thither; the
cattle were in the pens, and Tordis and the herds were
busy at the milking. Within the hut, porridge stood
cooked awaiting them, for the sæter-folk had spied them
by the beacon earlier in the day, and they were looked for.</p>
<p class="c015">Now, at length, was Kristin’s weeping stilled. She sat
upon her father’s knee and ate porridge and cream from
out the same spoon as he.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was to go next day to a lake farther in the
mountains, where lay some of his herdsmen with the bulls.
Kristin was to have gone with him, but now he said she
must stay in the hut while he was gone—“and you must
take heed, both Tordis and Isrid, to keep the door barred
and the smokehole closed till we come back, both for
Kristin’s sake, and for the poor unchristened babe’s here
in the cradle.”</p>
<p class="c015">Tordis was so frighted now that she dared no longer
stay with the little one up here, for she was still unchurched
<span class="pageno" id="Page_23">23</span>since her lying in—rather would she go down at once
and bide in the parish. Lavrans said this seemed to him
but wise; she could go down with them the next evening;
he thought he could get an older widow woman, serving
at Jörundgaard, up hither in her stead.</p>
<p class="c015">Tordis had spread sweet, fresh mountain grass under
the skins on the benches; it smelt so strong and good, and
Kristin was near asleep while her father said Our Father
and Ave Maria over her.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, ’twill be a long day before I take you with me to
the fells again,” said Lavrans, patting her cheek.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin woke up with a start:</p>
<p class="c015">“Father—mayn’t I go with you either when you go
southwards at harvest, as you promised—”</p>
<p class="c015">“We must see about that,” said Lavrans, and straightway
Kristin fell asleep between the sheepskins.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">2</h3>
<p class="c017">Each summer it was Lavrans Björgulfsön’s wont to ride
southward and see to his manor in Follo. These journeys
of her father were landmarks of each year in Kristin’s
life—the long weeks while he was gone, and the joy of his
homecoming with brave gifts: fine outlandish stuffs for her
bride-chest, figs, raisins and honey-bread from Oslo—and
many strange things to tell her.</p>
<p class="c015">But this year Kristin marked that there was something
more than common afoot toward the time of her father’s
going. ’Twas put off and off; the old men from Loptsgaard
rode over at odd times and sat about the board with her
father and mother; spoke of heritage, and freehold and redemption
rights, and hindrances to working the estate from
so far off, and the bishop’s seat and the King’s palace in
Oslo, which took so much labour from the farms round
about the town. They scarce ever had time to play with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_24">24</span>her, and she was sent out to the kitchen-house to the maids.
Her mother’s brother, Trond Ivarsön of Sundbu, came
over to them more often than was his wont—but <i>he</i> had
never been used to play with Kristin or pet her.</p>
<p class="c015">Little by little she came to have some inkling of what
it was all about. Ever since he was come to Sil, Lavrans
had sought to gather to himself land here in the parish,
and now had Sir Andres Gudmundsön tendered him Formo
in Sil, which was Sir Andres’ heritage from his mother,
in change for Skog, which lay more fittingly for him,
since he was with the King’s bodyguard and rarely came
hither to the Dale. Lavrans was loth to part with Skog,
which was his freehold heritage, and had come to his forebears
by royal gift; and yet the bargain would be for his
gain in many ways. But Lavran’s brother, Aasmund
Björgulfsön, too, would gladly have Skog—he dwelt now
in Hadeland, where he had wedded an estate—and ’twas
not sure that Aasmund would waive the right his kinship
gave him.</p>
<p class="c015">But one day Lavrans told Ragnfrid that this year he
would have Kristin with him to Skog—she should see the
manor where she was born, and which was his fathers’
home, now that it was like to pass from their hands. Ragnfrid
deemed this but right, though she feared not a little to
send so young a child on such a long journey, where she
herself could not be by.</p>
<p class="c015">For a time after Kristin had seen the Elf-maid she was
so fearful that she kept much within doors by her mother—she
was afraid even when she saw the folk who had
been with them on the fells and knew what had befallen her,
and she was glad her father had forbidden all talk of that
sight of hers.</p>
<p class="c015">But when some little time was gone by she began to think
she would like to speak of it. In her thoughts she told the
story to someone—she knew not whom—and, ’twas strange,
the more time went by, the better it seemed she remembered
<span class="pageno" id="Page_25">25</span>it, and the clearer and clearer grew the memory of the fair
lady.</p>
<p class="c015">But, strangest of all, each time she thought of the Elf-maid
there came upon her such a longing for the journey
to Skog, and more and more fear that her father would not
take her with him.</p>
<p class="c015">At last she woke one morning in the loft-room and saw
her mother and old Gunhild sitting on the threshold looking
over a heap of Lavrans’ squirrel-skins. Gunhild was a
widow who went the round of the farms and sewed fur lining
into cloaks and the like. And Kristin guessed from
their talk that now it was she should have a new cloak, lined
with squirrel-skin and edged with marten. And then she
knew she was to go with her father, and she sprang up in
bed and shrieked with gladness.</p>
<p class="c015">Her mother came over to her and stroked her cheek:</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you so glad then, my daughter, you are going so
far from me?”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid said the same that morning they were to set out.
They were up at cock-crow; it was dark without, with thick
mist between the houses, as Kristin peeped out of the door
at the weather. The mist billowed like grey smoke round
the lanterns, and out by the open house-doors. Folk ran
twixt stables and outhouses, and women came from the
kitchen with steaming porridge-pots and trenchers of meat
and pork—they were to have a plenty of good, strong
food before they rode out into the morning cold.</p>
<p class="c015">Indoors, saddlebags were shut and opened, and forgotten
things packed inside. Ragnfrid called to her husband’s
mind all the errands he must do for her, and spoke of kin
and friends upon the way—he must greet this one
and not forget to ask for that one.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin ran out and in; she said farewell many times to
all in the house, and could not hold still a moment in any
place.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_26">26</span>“Are you so glad then, Kristin, you are going from me
so far and for so long?” asked her mother. Kristin was
abashed and uneasy, and wished her mother had not said
this. But she answered as best she could:</p>
<p class="c015">“No, dear my mother, but I am glad that I am to go with
father.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, that you are indeed,” said Ragnfrid, sighing.
Then she kissed the child and put the last touches to her
dress.</p>
<p class="c015">At last they were in the saddle, the whole train—Kristin
rode on Morvin, who ere now had been her father’s
saddle-horse—he was old, wise and steady. Ragnfrid
held up the silver stoup with the stirrup-cup to her husband,
and laid a hand upon her daughter’s knee and bade her bear
in mind all her mother had taught her.</p>
<p class="c015">And so they rode out of the courtyard in the grey light.
The fog lay white as milk upon the parish. But in a while
it began to grow thinner and the sunlight sifted through.
And dripping with dew there shone through the white haze
hillsides, green with the aftermath, and pale stubble fields,
and yellow trees, and rowans bright with red berries.
Glimpses of blue mountain-sides seemed rising through the
steamy haze—then the mist broke and drove in wreaths
across the slopes, and they rode down the Dale in the most
glorious sunshine, Kristin in front of the troop at her
father’s side.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They came to Hamar one dark and rainy evening, with
Kristin sitting in front on her father’s saddle-bow, for she
was so weary that all things swam before her eyes—the
lake that gleamed wanly on their right, the gloomy
trees which dripped wet upon them as they rode beneath,
and the dark, leaden clusters of houses on the hueless, sodden
fields by the wayside.</p>
<p class="c015">She had stopped counting the days—it seemed as
though she had been an endless time on the journey. They
<span class="pageno" id="Page_27">27</span>had visited kindred and friends all down the Dale; she had
made acquaintance with children on the great manors and
had played in strange houses and barns and courtyards, and
had worn many times her red dress with the silk sleeves.
They had rested by the roadside by day when the weather
was fair; Arne had gathered nuts for her and she had slept
after meals upon the saddlebags wherein were their clothes.
At one great house they had silk-covered pillows in their
beds, but one night they lay at an inn, and in one of the
other beds was a woman who lay and wept softly and bitterly
each time Kristin was awake. But every night
she had slumbered safely behind her father’s broad, warm
back.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Kristin awoke with a start—she knew not where she
was, but the wondrous ringing and booming sound she had
heard in her dream went on. She was lying alone in a bed,
and on the hearth of the room a fire was burning.</p>
<p class="c015">She called upon her father, and he rose from the hearth
where he had been sitting, and came to her along with a
stout woman.</p>
<p class="c015">“Where are we?” she asked, and Lavrans laughed and
said:</p>
<p class="c015">“We’re in Hamar now, and here is Margret, the wife of
Fartein the shoemaker—you must greet her prettily now,
for you slept when we came hither. But now Margret will
help you to your clothes.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it morning then?” said Kristin. “I thought you were
even now coming to bed.—Oh! do <i>you</i> help me,” she
begged; but Lavrans said, something sternly, that she
should rather be thankful to kind Margret for helping her.</p>
<p class="c015">“And see what she has for you for a gift!”</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas a pair of red shoes with silken latchets. The woman
smiled at Kristin’s glad face, and drew on her shift
and hose up on the bed, that she should not need to tread
barefoot upon the clay floor.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_28">28</span>“What is it makes such a noise,” asked Kristin, “like a
church bell, but many bells?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, those are our bells,” laughed Margret. “Have
you heard not of the great minster here in the town—’tis
there you are going now. There goes the great bell! And
now ’tis ringing in the cloister and in the Church of Holy
Cross as well.”</p>
<p class="c015">Margret spread the butter thick upon Kristin’s bread and
gave her honey in her milk, that the food she took might
stand in more stead—she had scant time to eat.</p>
<p class="c015">Out of doors it was still dark and the weather had fallen
frosty. The fog was biting cold. The footprints of folk
and of cattle and horses were hard as though cast in iron,
so that Kristin bruised her feet in the thin, new shoes, and
once she trod through the ice on the gutter in the middle of
the street and her legs got wet and cold. Then Lavrans
took her on his back and carried her.</p>
<p class="c015">She strained her eyes in the gloom, but there was not
much she could see of the town—she caught a glimpse of
black house-gables and trees through the grey air. Then
they came out upon a little meadow that shone with rime,
and upon the further side of the meadow she dimly saw a
pale-grey building, big as a fell. Great stone houses stood
about, and at points lights glimmered from window-holes
in the walls. The bells, which had been silent for a time,
took to ringing again, and now it was with a sound so
strong that a cold shiver ran down his back.</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas like going into the mountain-side, thought Kristin,
when they mounted into the church forehall; it struck chill
and dark in there. They went through a door, and were
met by the stale, cold smell of incense and candles. Now
Kristin was in a dark and vastly lofty place. She could not
see where it ended, neither above nor to the sides, but lights
burned upon an altar far in front. There stood a priest,
and the echoes of his voice stole strangely round the great
place, like breathings and whisperings. Her father signed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_29">29</span>the cross with holy-water upon himself and the child, and
so they went forward; though he stepped warily, his spurs
rang loudly on the stone floor. They passed by giant pillars,
and betwixt the pillars it was like looking into coal-black
holes.</p>
<p class="c015">Forward, nigh to the altar, the father bent his knee, and
Kristin knelt beside him. She began to be able to make
things out in the gloom—gold and silver glittered on altars
in between the pillars, but upon that before them shone
tapers which stood and burned on gilt candlesticks, while
the light streamed back from the holy vessels and the big,
beautiful picture-panel behind. Kristin was brought again
to think of the mountain-folk’s hall—even so had she
dreamed it must be, splendid like this, but maybe with yet
more lights. And the dwarf-maid’s face came up before
her—but then she raised her eyes and spied upon the wall
above the altar, Christ himself, great and stern, lifted high
upon the cross. Fear came upon her—he did not look
mild and sorrowful as at home in their own snug timber-brown
church, where he hung heavily, with pierced feet and
hands, and bowed his blood-besprinkled head beneath the
crown of thorns.</p>
<p class="c015">Here, he stood upon a footboard with stiff, outstretched
arms and upright head; his gilded hair glittered; he was
crowned with a crown of gold, and his face was upturned
and harsh.</p>
<p class="c015">Then she tried to follow the priest’s words as he read
and chanted, but his speech was too hurried and unclear.
At home she was wont to understand each word, for Sira
Eirik had the clearest speech, and had taught her what the
holy words betokened in Norse, that she might the better
keep her thoughts with God while she was in church.</p>
<p class="c015">But she could not do that here, for every moment she
grew aware of something new in the darkness. There were
windows high up in the walls, and these began to shimmer
with the day. And near by where they knelt there was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_30">30</span>raised a wondrous scaffolding of timber, but beyond lay
blocks of light-coloured stone; and there stood mortar-troughs
and tools—and she heard folks coming tiptoeing
about in there. But then again her eyes fell upon the stern
Lord Christ upon the wall, and she strove to keep her
thoughts fixed upon the service. The icy cold from the
stone floor stiffened her legs right up to the thighs, and her
knees gave her pain. At length everything began to sway
about her, so weary was she.</p>
<p class="c015">Then her father rose; the mass was at an end. The priest
came forward and greeted her father. While they spoke,
Kristin sate herself down upon a step, for she saw the choirboy
had done the like. He yawned—and so she too fell a
yawning. When he marked that she looked at him, he set
his tongue in his cheek and twisted his eyes at her. Thereupon
he dug up a pouch from under his clothing and
emptied upon the flags all that was in it—fish-hooks, lumps
of lead, leather thongs and a pair of dice, and all the while
he made signs to her. Kristin wondered mightily.</p>
<p class="c015">But now the priest and her father looked at the children.
The priest laughed, and bade the boy be gone back to
school, but Lavrans frowned and took Kristin by the hand.</p>
<p class="c015">It began to grow lighter in the church now. Kristin
clung sleepily to Lavrans’ hand, while he and the priest
walked beneath the pile of timber and talked of Bishop
Ingjald’s building-work.</p>
<p class="c015">They wandered all about the church, and in the end went
out into the forehall. Thence a stone stairway led to the
western tower. Kristin tumbled wearily up the steps. The
priest opened a door to a fair chapel, and her father said
that Kristin should set herself without upon the steps and
wait while he went to shrift; and thereafter she could come
in and kiss St. Thomas’s shrine.</p>
<p class="c015">At that there came an old monk in an ash-brown frock
from out the chapel. He stopped a moment, smiled at the
child, and drew forth some sacks and wadmal cloths which
<span class="pageno" id="Page_31">31</span>had been stuck into a hole in the wall. These he spread
upon the landing:</p>
<p class="c015">“Sit you here, and you will not be so cold,” said he, and
passed down the steps upon his naked feet.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was sleeping when Canon Martein, as the priest
was called, came out and waked her with a touch. Up
from the church sounded the sweetest of song, and in the
chapel candles burned upon the altar. The priest made
sign that she should kneel by her father’s side, and then he
took down a little golden shrine which stood above the communion-table.
He whispered to her that in it was a piece
of St. Thomas of Canterbury’s bloody garments, and he
pointed at the saint’s figure on the shrine that Kristin might
press her lips to his feet.</p>
<p class="c015">The lovely tones still streamed from the church as they
came down the steps; Canon Martein said ’twas the organist
practising his art and the school-boys singing; but they had
not the time to stay and listen, for her father was hungry—he
had come fasting for confession—and they were now
bound for the guest-room of the canons’ close to take their
food.</p>
<p class="c015">The morning sun without was gilding the steep shores on
the further side of the great lake, and all the groves of yellowing
leaf-trees shone like gold-dust amid the dark-blue
pinewoods. The lake ran in waves with small dancing white
caps of foam to their heads. The wind blew cold and fresh
and the many-hued leaves drifted down upon the rimy hillsides.</p>
<p class="c015">A band of riders came forth from between the bishop’s
palace and the house of the Brothers of Holy Cross. Lavrans
stepped aside and bowed with a hand upon his breast,
while he all but swept the sward with his hat, so Kristin
could guess the nobleman in the fur cloak must be the
bishop himself, and she curtsied to the ground.</p>
<p class="c015">The bishop reined in his horse and gave back the greeting;
he beckoned Lavrans to him and spoke with him a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_32">32</span>while. In a short space Lavrans came back to the priest
and child and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now am I bidden to eat at the bishop’s palace—think
you Canon Martein, that one of the serving-men of the
canonry could go with this little maid of mine home to
Fartein the shoemaker’s and bid my men send Halvdan to
meet me here with Guldsveinen at the hour of nones.”</p>
<p class="c015">The priest answered, doubtless what he asked could be
done. But on this the bare-footed monk who had spoken
to Kristin on the tower stairs came forward and saluted
them:</p>
<p class="c015">“There is a man here in our guest-house who has an
errand of his own to the shoemaker’s; he can bear your
bidding thither, Lavrans Björgulfsön, and your daughter
can go with him or bide at the cloister with me till you
yourself are for home. I shall see to it that she has her
food there.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans thanked him but said, “’Twere shame you
should be troubled with the child, brother Edwin—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Brother Edwin draws to himself all the children he can
lay hands upon,” said Canon Martein and laughed. “’Tis
in this wise he gets someone to preach to—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, before you learnéd lords here in Hamar I dare
not proffer my poor discourses,” said the monk without
anger, and smiling. “All I am fit for is to talk to children
and peasants, but even so, ’tis not well, we know, to muzzle
the ox that treadeth out the corn.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked up at her father beseechingly; she thought
there was nothing she would like more than to go with
brother Edwin. So Lavrans gave thanks again, and while
her father and the priest went after the bishop’s train,
Kristin laid her hand in the monk’s, and they went down
towards the cloister, a cluster of wooden houses and a light-hued
stone church far down by the lake-side.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin gave her hand a little squeeze, and as they
looked at one another they had both to laugh. The monk
<span class="pageno" id="Page_33">33</span>was thin and tall, but very stoop-backed; the child thought
him like an old crane in the head, for ’twas little, with a
small, shining, bald pate above a shaggy, white rim of hair,
and set upon a long, thin, wrinkled neck. His nose was
large too, and pointed like a beak. But ’twas something
which made her light of heart and glad, only to look up into
the long, narrow, deep-lined face. The old, sea-blue eyes
were red-rimmed and the lids brown and thin as flakes. A
thousand wrinkles spread out from them; the wizened
cheeks with the reddish network of veins were scored with
furrows which ran down towards the thin-lipped mouth, but
’twas as though Brother Edwin had grown thus wrinkled
only through smiling at mankind.—Kristin thought she
had never seen anyone so blithe and gentle; it seemed he
bore some bright and privy gladness within which she
would get to know of when he began to speak.</p>
<p class="c015">They followed the fence of an apple-orchard where
there still hung upon the trees a few red and golden fruit.
Two Preaching Brothers in black and white gowns were
raking together withered beanshaws in the garden.</p>
<p class="c015">The cloister was not much unlike any other farm steading,
and the guest-house whither the monk led Kristin was
most like a poor peasant’s house, though there were many
bedsteads in it. In one of the beds lay an old man, and by
the hearth sat a woman swathing a little child; two bigger
children, boy and girl, stood beside her.</p>
<p class="c015">They murmured, both the man and the woman, that they
had not been given their breakfast yet: “None will be at
the pains to bear in food to us twice in the day, so we must
e’en starve while you run about the town, Brother Edwin!”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, be not peevish, Steinulv,” said the monk, “—Come
hither and make your greetings, Kristin—see this bonny,
sweet little maid who is to stay and eat with us to-day.”</p>
<p class="c015">He told how Steinulv had fallen sick on the way home
from a fair, and had got leave to lie here in the cloister
guest-house, for he had a kinswoman dwelling in the spital
<span class="pageno" id="Page_34">34</span>and she was so curst he could not endure to be there with
her.</p>
<p class="c015">“But I see well enough, they will soon be weary of having
me here,” said the peasant. “When you set forth again,
Brother Edwin, there will be none here that has time to
tend me, and they will surely have me to the spital again.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh! you will be well and strong long before I am done
with my work in the church,” said Brother Edwin. “Then
your son will come and fetch you—” He took up a kettle
of hot water from the hearth and let Kristin hold it while
he tended Steinulv. Thereupon the old man grew somewhat
easier, and soon after there came in a monk with food
and drink for them.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin said grace over the meat, and set himself
on the edge of the bed by Steinulv that he might help him
to take his food. Kristin went and sat by the woman and
gave the boy to eat, for he was so little he could not well
reach up to the porridge-dish, and he spilled upon himself
when he tried to dip into the beer-bowl. The woman was
from Hadeland, and she was come hither with her man and
her children to see her brother who was a monk here in the
cloister. But he was away wandering among the country
parishes, and she grumbled much that they must lie here
and waste their time.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin spoke the woman fair: she must not say
she wasted time when she was here in Bishopshamar. Here
were all the brave churches, and the monks and canons
held masses and sang the livelong day and night—and the
city was fine, finer than Oslo even, though ’twas somewhat
less; but here were gardens to almost every dwelling-place:
“You should have seen it when I came hither in the spring—’twas
white with blossom over all the town. And after,
when the sweet-brier burst forth—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, and much good is that to me now,” said the woman
sourly. “And here are more of holy places than of holiness,
methinks—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_35">35</span>The monk laughed a little and shook his head. Then he
routed amidst the straw of his bed and brought forth a
great handful of apples and pears which he shared amongst
the children. Kristin had never tasted such good fruit.
The juice ran out from the corners of her mouth every bite
she took.</p>
<p class="c015">But now Brother Edwin must go to the church, he said,
and Kristin should go with him. Their path went slantwise
across the close, and, by a little side wicket, they
passed into the choir.</p>
<p class="c015">They were still building at this church as well, so that
here too there stood a tall scaffolding in the cross where
nave and transepts met. Bishop Ingjald was bettering and
adorning the choir, said Brother Edwin—the bishop had
great wealth, and all his riches he used for the adornment
of the churches here in the town; he was a noble bishop
and a good man. The Preaching Friars in the Olav’s
cloister were good men too, clean-living, learned and humble;
’twas a poor cloister, but they had made him most
welcome—Brother Edwin had his home in the Minorite
cloister at Oslo, but he had leave to spend a term here in
Hamar diocese.</p>
<p class="c015">“But now come hither,” said he, and led Kristin forward
to the foot of the scaffolding. First he climbed up a
ladder and laid some boards straight up there, and then
he came down again and helped the child up with him.</p>
<p class="c015">Upon the grey-stone wall above her Kristin saw
wondrous fluttering flecks of light; red as blood and
yellow as beer, blue and brown and green. She would
have turned to look behind her, but the monk whispered:
“Turn not about.” But when they stood together high
upon the planking, he turned her gently round, and Kristin
saw a sight so fair she almost lost her breath.</p>
<p class="c015">Right over against her on the nave’s south wall stood a
picture and shone as if it were made of naught but gleaming
precious stones. The many-hued flecks of light upon
<span class="pageno" id="Page_36">36</span>the wall came from rays which stood out from that
picture; she herself and the monk stood in the midst of the
glory; her hands were red as though dipped in wine; the
monk’s visage seemed all golden, and his dark frock threw
the picture’s colours softly back. She looked up at him
questioningly, but he only nodded and smiled.</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas like standing far off and looking into the heavenly
kingdom. Behind a network of black streaks, she made out
little by little the Lord Christ himself in the most precious
of red robes, the Virgin Mary in raiment blue as heaven,
holy men and maidens in shining yellow and green and
violet array. They stood below arches and pillars of glimmering
houses, wound about with branches and twigs of
strange bright leafage—</p>
<p class="c015">The monk drew her a little further out upon the staging:</p>
<p class="c015">“Stand here,” he whispered, “and ’twill shine right upon
you from Christ’s own robe.”</p>
<p class="c015">From the church beneath there rose to them a faint odour
of incense and the smell of cold stone. It was dim below,
but the sun’s rays slanted in through a row of window-bays
in the nave’s south wall. Kristin began to understand that
the heavenly picture must be a sort of windowpane, for it
filled just such an opening. The others were empty or
filled with panes of horn set in wooden frames. A bird
came, set itself upon a windowsill, twittered a little and
flew away, and outside the wall of the choir they heard the
clank of metal on stone. All else was still; only the wind
came in small puffs, sighed a little round about the church
walls and died away.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, aye,” said Brother Edwin and sighed. “No one
here in the land can make the like—they paint on glass,
’tis true, in Nidaros, but not like this—But away in the
lands of the south, Kristin, in the great minsters, there they
have such picture-panes, big as the doors of the church
here—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought of the pictures in the church at home.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_37">37</span>There was St. Olav’s altar and St. Thomas of Canterbury’s
altar with pictures on their front panels and on the tabernacles
behind—but those pictures seemed to her dull and
lustreless as she thought of them now.</p>
<p class="c015">They went down the ladder and up into the choir. There
stood the altar table, naked and bare, and on the stone slab
were set many small boxes and cups of metal and wood and
earthenware; strange little knives and irons, pens and
brushes lay about. Brother Edwin said these were his
gear; he plied the crafts of painting pictures and carving
altar-tabernacles, and the fine panels which stood yonder by
the choir-stalls were his work. They were for the altarpieces
here in the Preaching Friars’ church.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin watched how he mixed up coloured powders and
stirred them into little cups of stoneware, and he let her
help him bear the things away to a bench by the wall.
While the monk went from one panel to another and
painted fine red lines in the bright hair of the holy men
and women so that one could see it curl and crinkle, Kristin
kept close at his heels and gazed and questioned, and he explained
to her what it was that he had limned.</p>
<p class="c015">On the one panel sat Christ in a chair of gold, and St.
Nicholas and St. Clement stood beneath a roof by his side.
And at the sides was painted St. Nicholas’ life and works.
In one place he sat as a suckling child upon his mother’s
knee; he turned away from the breast she reached him, for
he was so holy that from the very cradle he would not suck
more than once on Fridays. Alongside of that was a picture
of him as he laid the money-purses before the door of
the house where dwelt the three maids who were so poor
they could not find husbands. She saw how he healed the
Roman knight’s child, and saw the knight sailing in a boat
with the false chalice in his hands. He had vowed the holy
bishop a chalice of gold which had been in his house a
thousand years, as guerdon for bringing his son back to
health again. But he was minded to trick St. Nicholas and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_38">38</span>give him a false chalice instead; therefore the boy fell into
the sea with the true beaker in his hands. But St. Nicholas
led the child unhurt underneath the water and up on to the
shore just as his father stood in St. Nicholas’ church and
offered the false vessel. It all stood painted upon the panels
in gold and the fairest colours.</p>
<p class="c015">On another panel sat the Virgin Mary with the Christ-child
on her knee; he pressed his mother’s chin with the one
hand and held an apple in the other. Beside them stood
St. Sunniva and St. Christina. They bowed in lovely wise
from their waists, their faces were the fairest red and white
and they had golden hair and golden crowns.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin steadied himself with the left hand on the
right wrist, and painted leaves and roses on the crowns.</p>
<p class="c015">“The dragon is all too small, methinks,” said Kristin,
looking at her holy namesake’s picture. “It looks not as
though it could swallow up the maiden.”</p>
<p class="c015">“And that it could not either,” said Brother Edwin. “It
was not bigger. Dragons and all such-like that serve the
devil, seem great only so long as fear is in ourselves. But
if a man seek God fervently and with all his soul so that his
longing wins into his strength, then does the devil’s power
suffer at once such great downfall that his tools become
small and powerless—dragons and evil spirits sink down
and become no bigger than sprites and cats and crows.
You see that the whole mountain St. Sunniva was in is no
larger than that she can wrap it within the skirt of her
gown.”</p>
<p class="c015">“But were they not in the caves then,” asked Kristin,
“St. Sunniva and the Selje-men? Is not that true?”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk twinkled at her and smiled again:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis both true and untrue. It seemed so to the folk who
found the holy bodies. And true it is that it seemed so to
Sunniva and the Selje-men, for they were humble and
thought only that the world is stronger than all sinful
mankind, and they thought not that they themselves were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_39">39</span>stronger than the world, because they loved it not. But
had they but known it, they could have taken all the hills
and slung them forth into the sea like so many pebbles.
No one, nor anything, can harm us child, save what we
fear or love.”</p>
<p class="c015">“But if a body doth not fear nor love God?” asked
Kristin, affrighted.</p>
<p class="c015">The monk took her yellow hair in his hand, bent Kristin’s
head back gently and looked down into her face; his
eyes were wide open and blue.</p>
<p class="c015">“There is no man nor woman, Kristin, who does not
love and fear God, but ’tis because our hearts are divided
twixt love of God and fear of the devil and fondness for
the world and the flesh, that we are unhappy in life and
death. For if a man had not any yearning after God and
God’s being, then should he thrive in hell, and ’twould be
we alone who would not understand that there he had
gotten what his heart desired. For there the fire would
not burn him if he did not long for coolness, nor would
he feel the torment of the serpents’ bite, if he knew not
the yearning after peace.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked up in his face; she understood none of
all this. Brother Edwin went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas God’s loving-kindness towards us that, seeing
how our hearts are drawn asunder, He came down and
dwelt among us, that He might taste in the flesh the lures
of the devil when he decoys us with power and splendour,
as well as the menace of the world when it offers us
blows and scorn and sharp nails in hands and feet. In
such wise did He show us the way and make manifest His
love—”</p>
<p class="c015">He looked down upon the child’s grave, set face—then
he laughed a little and said with quite another voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“Do you know who ’twas that first knew our Lord had
caused himself to be born? ’Twas the cock; he saw
the star and so he said—all the beasts could talk
<span class="pageno" id="Page_40">40</span>Latin in those days; he cried: ‘Christus natus est!’”</p>
<p class="c015">He crowed these last words so like a cock that Kristin
fell to laughing heartily. And it did her good to laugh,
for all the strange things Brother Edwin had just been
saying had laid a burden of awe on her heart.</p>
<p class="c015">The monk laughed himself:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, and when the ox heard that, he began to low:
‘Ubi, ubi, ubi.’</p>
<p class="c015">“But the goat bleated and said: ‘Betlem, Betlem, Betlem!’</p>
<p class="c015">“And the sheep longed so to see Our Lady and her Son
that she baa-ed out at once: ‘Eamus, eamus!’</p>
<p class="c015">“And the new-born calf that lay in the straw, raised
itself and stood upon its feet. ‘Volo, volo, volo!’ it said.</p>
<p class="c015">“You never heard that before? No, I can believe it;
I know that he is a worthy priest, that Sira Eirik that you
have up in your parts, and learned; but he knows not
this, I warrant; for a man does not learn it except he
journey to Paris—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have <i>you</i> been to Paris then?” asked the child.</p>
<p class="c015">“God bless you, little Kristin, I have been in Paris and
have travelled round elsewhere in the world as well; and
you must not believe aught else than that I am afraid of
the devil, and love and covet like any other fool. But
I hold fast to the Cross with all my might—one must
cling to it like a kitten to a lath when it has fallen in the
sea—</p>
<p class="c015">“And you, Kristin—how would you like to offer up
this bonny hair and serve Our Lady like these brides I
have figured here?”</p>
<p class="c015">“We have no child at home but me,” answered Kristin.
“So ’tis like that I must marry. And I trow mother
has chests and lockers with my bridal gear standing ready
even now.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, aye,” said Brother Edwin, and stroked her forehead.
“’Tis thus that folk deal with their children now.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_41">41</span>To God they give the daughters who are lame or purblind
or ugly or blemished, or they let Him have back the children
when they deem Him to have given them more than
they need. And then they wonder that all who dwell in
the cloisters are not holy men and maids—”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin took her into the sacristy and showed
her the cloister books which stood there in a book-case;
there were the fairest pictures in them. But when one of
the monks came in, Brother Edwin made as though he
were but seeking an ass’s head to copy. Afterward he
shook his head at himself:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, there you see what fear does, Kristin—but they’re
so fearful about their books in the house here. Had I
the true faith and love, I would not stand here as I do
and lie to Brother Aasulv—But then I could take these
old fur mittens here and hang them upon yonder sunbeam—”</p>
<p class="c015">She was with the monk to dinner over in the guest-house,
but for the rest she sat in the church the whole
day and watched his work and chatted with him. And
first when Lavrans came to fetch her, did either she or the
monk remember the message that should have been sent
to the shoemaker.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Afterwards Kristin remembered these days in Hamar
better than all else that befell her on the long journey.
Oslo, indeed, was a greater town than Hamar, but now
that she had seen a market town, it did not seem to her
so notable. Nor did she deem it as fair at Skog as at
Jörundgaard, though the houses were grander—but she
was glad she was not to dwell there. The manor lay upon a
hillside; below was the Botnfjord, grey, and sad with
dark forest, and on the further shore and behind the houses
the forest stood with the sky right down upon the tree-tops.
There were no high, steep fells as at home, to hold the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_42">42</span>heavens high above one and to keep the sight sheltered
and in bounds so that the world might seem neither too
big nor too little.</p>
<p class="c015">The journey home was cold; it was nigh upon Advent;
but, when they were come a little way up the Dale, snow
was lying, and so they borrowed sleighs and drove most
of the way.</p>
<p class="c015">With the affair of the estates it fell out so that Lavrans
made Skog over to his brother Aasmund, keeping the
right of redemption for himself and his heirs.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">3</h3>
<p class="c017">THE spring after Kristin’s long journey, Ragnfrid bore
her husband another daughter. Both father and mother
had wished indeed that it might be a son, but they
soon took comfort, and were filled with the tenderest
love for little Ulvhild. She was a most fair child,
healthy, good, happy and quiet. Ragnfrid doted so
on this new baby that she went on suckling it during
the second year of its life; wherefore, on Sira Eirik’s
counsel, she left off somewhat her strict fasts and religious
exercises while she had the child at the breast. On this
account and by reason of her joy in Ulvhild, her bloom
came back to her, and Lavrans thought he had never seen
his wife so happy or so fair and kindly in all the years
he had been wed.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin, too, felt that great happiness had come to them
with this tender little sister. That her mother’s heavy
mood made a stillness about her home, had never come
into her thought; she had deemed it was but as it should
be that her mother should correct and chide her, while her
father played and jested with her. But Ragnfrid was
much gentler with her now and gave her more freedom;
petted her more too; and so Kristin little heeded that her
<span class="pageno" id="Page_43">43</span>mother had much less time to tend her. She loved Ulvhild
as much as the others, and was joyful when they let
her carry or rock her sister, and in time there was still
more sport with the little one when she began to creep
and walk and talk and Kristin could play with her.</p>
<p class="c015">Thus there went by three good years for the Jörundgaard
folk. They had fortune with them in many ways,
and Lavrans built and bettered round about on the manor,
for the buildings and cattlesheds were old and small when
he came thither—the Gjeslings had had the place leased
out for more lifetimes than one.</p>
<p class="c015">Now it fell out at Whitsuntide in the third year that
Trond Ivarsön from Sundbu, with his wife Gudrid and
his three small sons, were come to Jörundgaard to visit
them. One morning the older folk were sitting talking
in the balcony of the loft-room while the children played
about in the courtyard below. In the yard Lavrans had
begun a new dwelling-house, and the children were climbing
and creeping about on the timber brought together
for the building. One of the Gjesling boys had struck
at Ulvhild and made her weep; and at that Trond came
down and gave his son a buffet, and took Ulvhild up into
his arms. She was the fairest and sweetest child a man’s
eyes could see, and her uncle had much love for her,
though else he cared not for children.</p>
<p class="c015">Just then there came a man across the court from the
cattleyard, dragging at a great, black bull; but the bull
was savage and unmanageable and broke away from the
man. Trond sprang up upon the pile of timber, driving
the bigger children up before him, but he had Ulvhild in
his arms and his youngest son by the hand. Then a beam
turned under his feet and Ulvhild slipped from his grasp
and fell to the ground. The beam slipped after, rolled
over on the child and lay across her back.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was down from the balcony in the same instant;
he ran up and was in act to lift the beam when
<span class="pageno" id="Page_44">44</span>the bull rushed at him. He tried to seize it by the horns,
but was flung down and gored. But getting then a grip
of its nostrils, he half raised himself from the ground and
managed to hold the brute till Trond came to himself
from his bewilderment and the farm servants, running
from the houses, cast thongs about the beast and held it
fast.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid was on her knees trying to lift the beam; and
now Lavrans was able to ease it so far that she could
draw the child from under and into her lap. The little
one wailed piteously when they touched her, but her
mother sobbed aloud:</p>
<p class="c015">“She lives, thank God, she lives!—”</p>
<p class="c015">It was great wonder the child had not been quite crushed;
but the log had chanced to fall so that it rested with
one end upon a stone in the grass. When Lavrans stood
up again, blood was running from the corners of his
mouth, and his clothes were all torn at the breast by the
bull’s horns.</p>
<p class="c015">Tordis came running with a skin coverlet; warily she
and Ragnfrid moved the child on to it, but it seemed as
though she suffered unbearable pain at the lightest touch.
Her mother and Tordis bore her into the winter-room.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood upon the timber pile white and stock still,
while the little boys clung round her weeping. All the
house and farm folk were now huddled together in the
courtyard, the women weeping and wailing. Lavrans bade
them saddle Guldsveinen and another horse as well; but
when Arne came with the horses, Lavrans fell to the
ground when he tried to climb to the saddle. So he bade
Arne ride for the priest, while Halvdan went southward for
a leech-woman who dwelt by the meeting of the rivers.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin saw that her father was ashy white in the face,
and that he had bled till his light-blue garments were
covered all over with red-brown stains. All at once he
stood upright, snatched an axe from one of the men and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_45">45</span>went forward where some of the folk stood holding on to
the bull. He smote the beast between the horns with the
back of the axe—it dropped forward on its knees; but Lavrans
ceased not striking till its blood and brains were scattered
all about. Then a fit of coughing took him and he
sank backwards on the ground. Trond and another man
came to him and bore him within the house.</p>
<p class="c015">At that, Kristin thought her father was surely dead;
she screamed loudly and ran after, calling to him as if
her heart were breaking.</p>
<p class="c015">In the winter-room Ulvhild had been laid on the great
bed—all the pillows were thrown out upon the floor, so
that the child lay flat. ’Twas as though already she lay
stretched on the dead-straw. But she wailed loudly and
without cease, and her mother lay bent over her, soothing
and patting the child, wild with grief that she could do
naught to help her.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans lay upon the other bed: he rose and staggered
across the floor that he might comfort his wife. At that
she started up and shrieked:</p>
<p class="c015">“Touch me not, touch me not! Jesus, Jesus,—’twere
liker you should strike me dead—never will it end, the
ill-fortune I bring upon you—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You?—Dear my wife, ’tis not you that have brought
this on us,” said Lavrans, and laid a hand upon her shoulder.
She shuddered at that, and her light-grey eyes shone
in her lean, sallow face.</p>
<p class="c015">“Doubtless she means that ’twas my doing,” said Trond
Ivarsön roughly. His sister looked at him with hate in
her eyes, and answered:</p>
<p class="c015">“Trond knows what I mean.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin ran forward to her parents, but both thrust her
away from them, and Tordis, coming in with a kettle
of hot water, took her gently by the shoulder and said,
“Go—go over to our house, Kristin; you are in the way
here.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_46">46</span>Tordis was for seeing to Lavrans’ hurt—he had set himself
down on the step before the bed—but he said there
was little amiss with him:</p>
<p class="c015">“But is there naught you can do to ease Ulvhild’s pain
a little—God help us! her crying would move the very
stones in the mountain-side!”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay; we dare not touch her ere the priest or Ingegjerd
the leech-wife comes,” said Tordis.</p>
<p class="c015">Arne came just then with word that Sira Eirik was not
at home. Ragnfrid stood a while wringing her hands.
Then she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Send to Lady Aashild of Haugen! Naught matters
now, if only Ulvhild may be saved—”</p>
<p class="c015">No one gave heed to Kristin. She crept on to the
bench behind the bed’s head, crouched down and laid her
head upon her knees.</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed to her now as if stony hands were pressing on
her heart. Lady Aashild was to be fetched! Her mother
would not have them send for Lady Aashild, even when
she herself was near death’s door at Ulvhild’s birth, nor
yet when Kristin was so sick of the fever. She was a
witch-wife, folk said—the bishop of Oslo and the chapter
had held session on her; and she must have been put to
death or even burned, had it not been that she was of
such high birth and had been like a sister to Queen Ingebjörg—but
folk said she had given her first husband
poison, and him she now had, Sir Björn, she had drawn
to her by witchcraft; he was young enough to be her son.
She had children too, but they came never to see their
mother, and these two highborn folk, Björn and Aashild,
lived upon a petty farm in Dovre, and had lost all their
wealth. None of the great folk in the Dale would have
to do with them, but, privily, folk sought her counsel—nay,
poor folk went openly to her with their troubles and
hurts; they said she was kind, but they feared her too.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought her mother, who else was wont to pray
<span class="pageno" id="Page_47">47</span>so much, should rather have called on God and the Virgin
now. She tried to pray herself—to St. Olav most of
all, for she knew he was so good and helped so many who
suffered from sickness and wounds or broken bones. But
she could not keep her thoughts together.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father and mother were alone in the room now.
Lavrans had laid himself upon his bed again, and Ragnfrid
sat bent over the sick child, passing, from time to
time, a damp cloth over her forehead and hands, and wetting
her lips with wine.</p>
<p class="c015">A long time went by. Tordis looked in between whiles,
and would fain have helped, but Ragnfrid sent her out
each time. Kristin wept silently and prayed to herself,
but all the while she thought of the witch-wife and waited
eagerly to see her come in.</p>
<p class="c015">Suddenly Ragnfrid asked in the silence:</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you sleeping, Lavrans?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” answered her husband. “I am listening to Ulvhild.
God will surely help His innocent lamb, wife—we
dare not doubt it. But ’tis weary lying here waiting—”</p>
<p class="c015">“God,” said Ragnfrid, hopelessly, “hates me for my sins.
’Tis well with my children, where they are, I doubt not
that, and now ’tis like Ulvhild’s hour has come, too—but
me he has cast off, for my heart is a viper’s nest, full of
sin and sorrow—”</p>
<p class="c015">Then someone lifted the latch—Sira Eirik stepped in,
straightened his huge frame where he stood and said in
his clear, deep voice: “God help all in this house!”</p>
<p class="c015">The priest put the box with his medicines on the step
before the bed and went to the open hearth and poured
warm water over his hands. Then he took a cross from
his bosom, struck out with it to all four corners of the
room and mumbled something in Latin. Thereupon he
opened the smoke-vent so that the light might stream into
the room, and went and looked at Ulvhild.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin grew afraid he might find her and send her out—not
<span class="pageno" id="Page_48">48</span>often did Sira Eirik’s eyes let much escape them.
But the priest did not look round. He took a flask from
the box, poured somewhat upon a wad of finely carded
wool and laid it over Ulvhild’s mouth and nose.</p>
<p class="c015">“Now she will soon suffer less,” said the priest. He
went to Lavrans and tended his wounds, while they told
him how the mishap had come to pass. Lavrans had two
ribs broken and had a wound in the lungs; but the priest
thought that for him there was no great fear.</p>
<p class="c015">“And Ulvhild?” asked the father fearfully.</p>
<p class="c015">“I will tell you when I have looked at her more nearly,”
answered the priest; “but you must lie in the loft-room,
so that there may be more quiet and room here for those
who must tend her.” He laid Lavrans’ arm about his
own shoulder, took firm hold under the man, and bore
him out. Kristin would fain have gone with her father
now, but she dared not show herself.</p>
<p class="c015">When Sira Eirik came back, he did not speak to Ragnfrid,
but first cut the clothes off Ulvhild, who now moaned
less and seemed half asleep. Then carefully he felt with
his hands over the child’s body and limbs.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it so ill with my child, Eirik, that you know not
how to save her, since you say naught,” asked Ragnfrid
under her breath.</p>
<p class="c015">The priest answered low:</p>
<p class="c015">“It seems as though her back were badly hurt, Ragnfrid;
I see no better way than to leave all in God’s hands and
St. Olav’s—much there is not that I can do.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then must we pray,” cried the mother passionately:
“—you know well that Lavrans and I will give you all
you ask, and spare nothing if so be your prayers can win
God to grant that Ulvhild may live.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould seem to me a miracle,” said the priest, “were
she to live and have her health again.”</p>
<p class="c015">“And is’t not of miracles that you preach late and early—believe
<span class="pageno" id="Page_49">49</span>you not that a miracle can happen with my
child,” she said, as wildly as before.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis true,” replied the priest, “that miracles happen;
but God does not grant the prayers of all—we know not
His secret counsel. And think you not, it would be worst
of all should this fair little maid grow up marred or crippled?”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid shook her head. She wailed softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have lost so many, priest: I cannot lose her too!”</p>
<p class="c015">“I will do all that I may,” answered the priest, “and
pray with all my power. But you must strive, Ragnfrid,
to bear the cross God lays upon you.”</p>
<p class="c015">The mother moaned low:</p>
<p class="c015">“None of my children have I loved like this little one—if
she too be taken from me, full sure I am my heart will
break.”</p>
<p class="c015">“God help you, Ragnfrid Ivarsdatter,” said Sira Eirik,
and shook his head. “In all your praying and fasting,
you have thought only to force your will upon God. Can
you wonder that it has helped but little?”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid looked defiantly at the priest, and spoke:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have sent for the Lady Aashild even now.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, you know her; I know her not,” replied the priest.</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot live without Ulvhild,” said Ragnfrid as before.
“If so be God will not help her, I will seek counsel
of Lady Aashild, or e’en give myself to the devil if he
will help!”</p>
<p class="c015">The priest looked as though he would answer sharply,
but checked himself again. He bent and felt the limbs of
the little sick girl once more:</p>
<p class="c015">“Her hands and feet are cold,” he said. “We must lay
jars of hot water about her—and then you must touch her
no more till Lady Aashild comes.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin let herself sink back noiselessly on the bench
and lay as if asleep. Her heart beat hard with fear—she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_50">50</span>had understood but little of the talk between Sira Eirik
and her mother, but it had frightened her terribly, and
the child knew well that it had not been for her ears.</p>
<p class="c015">Her mother rose up to go for the hot water jars; and
suddenly she burst out sobbing: “But yet pray for us,
Sira Eirik.”</p>
<p class="c015">Soon after she came back with Tordis. Then the priest
and the women busied themselves with Ulvhild, and soon
Kristin was found and sent away.</p>
<p class="c015">The light dazzled the child as she stood without in the
courtyard. She had thought that most of the day must
have gone by while she sat in the dark winter-room, and
yet the houses stood there light-grey, and the grass was
shining like silk in the white midday sunshine. The river
gleamed behind the dun and golden trellis-work of the
alder-brakes—it filled the air with its gladsome rushing
sound, for here by Jörundgaard it ran swiftly over a flat
bed strewn with boulders. The mountain-walls rose into
the thin blue haze, and the becks sprang down their sides
through the melting snows. The sweet, strong springtide
out of doors brought tears to her eyes, for sorrow at the
helplessness she felt all about her.</p>
<p class="c015">There was no one in the courtyard, but she heard voices
in the housecarls’ cottage. Fresh earth had been strewn
over the spot where her father had killed the bull. She
knew not what to do with herself—so she crept behind the
wall of the new house—two log-courses had already been
laid. Inside lay Ulvhild’s playthings and her own; she
put them all together and laid them in a hole between the
lowest log and the foundation wall. Of late Ulvhild had
wanted all her toys; this had vexed her sometimes. Now
she thought, if her sister got well, she would give her all
she had. And this thought comforted her a little.</p>
<p class="c015">She thought of the monk in Hamar—<i>he</i> was sure that
miracles could happen for every one. But Sira Eirik was
not so sure about it, nor her parents either—and she was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_51">51</span>used to think as they did. A heavy weight fell upon her
as it came to her for the first time that folk could think
so unlike about so many things—not only bad, ungodly
men and good men, but such men as Brother Edwin and
Sira Eirik,—even her mother and her father: she felt
all at once that they too thought not alike about many
things—</p>
<p class="c015">Tordis found her there in the corner, asleep, late in
the day, and took her to her own house; the child had eaten
nothing since the morning. Tordis watched with Ragnfrid
over Ulvhild through the night, and Kristin lay in
Tordis’ bed with Jon, Tordis’ husband, and Eivind and
Orm, their little boys. The smell of their bodies, the man’s
snoring and the children’s even breathing made Kristin
weep silently. It was no longer ago than last evening that
she had lain down, as each night of her life before, by
her own father and mother and little Ulvhild—it was as
though a nest had been riven asunder and scattered and
she herself lay cast out from the shelter of the wings which
had always kept her warm. At last she cried herself to
sleep, alone and unhappy among these strange folk.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Next morning as soon as she was up, she heard that
her mother’s brother and all his party had left the place—in
anger; Trond had called his sister a foolish, crazy
woman, and his brother-in-law a soft simpleton who had
never known how to rule his wife. Kristin grew hot with
wrath, but she was ashamed too—she understood well
enough that a most unseemly thing had befallen in that her
mother had driven her nearest kin from the house. And
for the first time she dimly felt that there was something
about her mother that was not as it should be—that she
was not the same as other women.</p>
<p class="c015">While she stood brooding on this, a serving-maid came
and said she was to go up to the loft-room to her father.</p>
<p class="c015">But when she was come into the room Kristin forgot to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_52">52</span>look at him, for right opposite the open door, with the
light full upon her face, sat a little woman who she
guessed must be the witch-wife. And yet Kristin had
never thought that she would look like this.</p>
<p class="c015">She seemed small as a child and slightly made, as she
sat in the great high-backed arm-chair which had been
brought up thither. A table had been set before her too,
covered with Ragnfrid’s finest, fringed, linen tablecloth.
Bacon and fowl were set out upon the silver platter; there
was wine in a mazer bowl, and she had Lavrans’ own silver
goblet to drink from. She had finished eating and was
busy drying her small and slender hands on one of Ragnfrid’s
best hand-towels. Ragnfrid herself stood in front
of her and held for her a brass basin with water.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild let the hand-towel sink into her lap; she
smiled to the child, and said in a clear and lovely voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“Come hither to me, child!” Then to the mother: “Fair
children are these you have, Ragnfrid.”</p>
<p class="c015">Her face was greatly wrinkled, but as clear white and
pink as a child’s, and it looked as though her skin must
be just as soft and fine to the touch. Her mouth was as
red and fresh as a young woman’s, and her large, hazel
eyes shone bright. A fine, white, linen headdress lay close
about her face and was fastened under her chin with a
golden clasp; over it she had a veil of soft, dark-blue
wool; it fell over her shoulders and far down upon her
dark, well-fitting dress. She was upright as a wand, and
Kristin felt more than thought that she had never seen a
woman so fair and so mannerly as was this old witch-wife,
with whom the great folk of the valley would have
naught to do.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild held Kristin’s hand in her old, soft one;
and spoke to her with kindly jesting; but Kristin could
not answer a word. Then said Lady Aashild with a little
laugh:</p>
<p class="c015">“Is she afraid of me, think you?”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_53">53</span>“Nay, nay,” Kristin all but shouted. And then Lady
Aashild laughed still more, and said to the mother:</p>
<p class="c015">“She has wise eyes, this daughter of yours, and good
strong hands, nor is she used to be idle, I can see. You
will need one by-and-by to help you tend Ulvhild, when I
am gone. ’Twere well, therefore, you let Kristin be by me
and help while yet I am here—she is old enough for that;
eleven years is she not?”</p>
<p class="c015">Thereupon the Lady Aashild went out, and Kristin
would have followed her, but Lavrans called to her from
his bed. He lay flat upon his back with the pillows stuffed
beneath his updrawn knees; Lady Aashild had bidden
that he should lie so, that the hurt in his breast might the
sooner heal.</p>
<p class="c015">“Now surely you will soon be well, sir father, will you
not?” asked Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans looked up at her—the child had never said
“sir” to him before. Then he said gravely:</p>
<p class="c015">“For me there is naught to fear;—’tis worse with your
sister.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Kristin, and sighed.</p>
<p class="c015">She stood yet a little while by his bed. Her father said
no more, and Kristin found naught to say. And when
Lavrans after a while said she should go down to her mother
and Lady Aashild, Kristin hastened out and ran across the
courtyard down into the winter-room.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">4</h3>
<p class="c017">Lady Aashild stayed on at Jörundgaard most of the summer.
Thus it fell out that folk came thither seeking her
counsel.—Kristin heard Sira Eirik fling at this now and
then, and it came into her mind that her father and mother,
too, were not pleased. But she put all thoughts of such
things from her, nor did she ponder over what she thought
of Lady Aashild, but was with her ever, and tired not of
listening to the lady and of watching her.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_54">54</span>Ulvhild still lay stretched upon her back in the great bed.
Her little face was white to the lips, and dark rings had
come about her eyes. Her lovely yellow hair had a stale
smell, it had been unwashed for so long, and it had grown
dark and lost all gloss and curl, so that it looked like old,
burnt-up hay. She looked tired and suffering and patient;
but she smiled faintly and wanly at her sister when Kristin
sat down on the bed-side by her and chattered and showed
the child all the fine gifts there were for her from her father
and mother and from their friends and kinsfolk from far
around. There were dolls and wooden birds and beasts,
and a little draught-board, trinkets and velvet caps and
coloured ribbons; Kristin kept them all together in a box
for her—and Ulvhild looked at them all with her grave eyes,
and, sighing, dropped the treasures from her weary hands.</p>
<p class="c015">But when Lady Aashild came nigh, Ulvhild’s face lit up
with gladness. Eagerly she drank the quenching and sleepy
drinks Lady Aashild brewed for her; when Lady Aashild
tended her hurts she made no plaint, and lay happy listening
when the Lady played on Lavrans’ harp and sang—she
had great store of ballads strange to the folk of the Dale.</p>
<p class="c015">Often she sang to Kristin when Ulvhild lay asleep. And
then at times she would tell of her youth, when she dwelt
in the South at the courts of King Magnus and King Eirik
and their Queens.</p>
<p class="c015">Once as they sat thus and Lady Aashild told of these
things, there slipped from Kristin’s lips a thought she had
often had in mind:</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks it is strange you can be so glad at all times,
you who have been used to—” she broke off and grew red.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild looked down at the child with a smile:</p>
<p class="c015">“Mean you because I am parted from all that now?”
She laughed quietly, and said: “I have had my happy
time, Kristin, and I am not so foolish as to murmur, if now,
since I have drunk up my wine and beer, I have to put up
with skimmed milk and sour. Good days may last long if
<span class="pageno" id="Page_55">55</span>one lives wisely and deals warily with what one has; all
wise folk know that, and ’tis therefore, I trow, that wise
folk must rest content with good days—for the best days of
all cost very dear. In this world they call him a fool who
wastes his heritage that he may make merry in the days of
his youth. As to that each man may deem as he lists. But
that man only do I call a fool and a very dolt who rues his
bargain after it is made; and twice a simpleton and a fool
of fools is he who thinks to see more of his boon-companions
after his heritage is gone—”</p>
<p class="c015">“—Is there aught amiss with Ulvhild?” she called gently
across to Ragnfrid, who had made a sharp movement where
she sat by the child’s bed.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, she sleeps well,” said the child’s mother and came
over to Lady Aashild and Kristin at the hearth. Her hands
on the pole of the smoke-vent, she stood and looked down
into Lady Aashild’s face.</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin doth not understand such things,” she said.</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” answered the Lady. “But she learned her prayers,
too, I doubt not, before she understood them. The times
when we need prayers or counsel, we are little like to be in
a mood to learn, nor yet to understand.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid drew her dark eyebrows together thoughtfully.
At such times her bright, deep-set eyes looked like barns below
a dark-wooded hillside, so Kristin had often thought
when she was little—or so she had heard others say. Lady
Aashild looked at Ragnfrid with her little half-smile, and
the mother seated herself upon the edge of the hearth, and
taking a twig, stuck it into the embers.</p>
<p class="c015">“But he who has wasted his heritage upon the sorriest
goods—and thereafter beholds a treasure he would gladly
give his life to own—think you not he must rue bitterly his
own folly?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No doing without some rueing, Ragnfrid,” said Lady
Aashild. “And he who is willing to give his life, should
make the venture and see what he can win—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_56">56</span>Ragnfrid plucked the burning twig from the fire, blew
out the flame and bent her hand about the glowing end, so
that it shone out blood-red from between her fingers.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh! these are words, words, and only words, Lady
Aashild.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Well,” said the other, “truly, Ragnfrid, there is not
much that’s worth buying so dear as with one’s life.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, but there is,” said Ragnfrid passionately, and she
whispered so it could scarce be heard: “My husband.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Ragnfrid,” said Lady Aashild in a low voice: “So hath
many a maid thought when she strove to bind a man to her
and gave her maidenhood to do it. But have you not read
of men and maids who gave to God all they owned, went into
a cloister or naked into the wilds, and repented after. Aye,
they are called fools in the godly books. And ’twould sure
be sinful to think God cheated <i>them</i> over their bargain.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid sat quite still a while. Then Lady Aashild
said:</p>
<p class="c015">“You must come now, Kristin; ’tis time we went and gathered
dew for Ulvhild’s morning wash.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Outside the courtyard lay all black and white in the moonlight.
Ragnfrid went with them, through the farm-yard,
down to the gate of the cabbage garden. Kristin saw her
mother’s thin, dark figure leaning there, while she was shaking
the dew from the big, icy-cold cabbage leaves, and the
folds of the lady’s-mantles, into her father’s silver goblet.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild walked silent at Kristin’s side. She was
there only to watch over her, for it was not well to let a
child go out alone on such a night. But the dew had more
virtue if gathered by an innocent maid.</p>
<p class="c015">When they came back to the gate Ragnfrid was gone.
Kristin was shaking with the cold as she gave the icy silver
cup into Lady Aashild’s hands. She ran in her wet shoes
over toward the loft-room, where she slept now with her
<span class="pageno" id="Page_57">57</span>father. She had her foot upon the first step when Ragnfrid
stepped out of the shadow of the balcony. In her hands
she bore a steaming bowl.</p>
<p class="c015">“Here, I have warmed some beer for you, daughter,” said
the mother.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thanked her mother gladly, and put the bowl to
her lips. Then Ragnfrid asked:</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin—the prayers and all the other things that Lady
Aashild teaches you—you are sure there is naught sinful or
ungodly in them?”</p>
<p class="c015">“That I can never believe,” answered the child. “There
is Jesus’ name and the Virgin Mary’s, and the names of the
Saints in them all—”</p>
<p class="c015">“What is it she teaches you,” asked her mother again.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh!—about herbs—and charms to stop running blood
and cure warts and sore eyes—and moth in clothes and
mice in the store-room. And what herbs one should pluck
in sunshine, and which have virtue in the rain—But the
prayers I must not tell to anyone, for then they lose their
power,” said she quickly.</p>
<p class="c015">Her mother took the empty bowl and put it upon the step.
Then suddenly she threw her arms around her daughter, and
pressed her tightly to her and kissed her.—Kristin felt
that her mother’s cheeks were wet and hot:</p>
<p class="c015">“May God and Our Lady guard and shield you from all
evil—we have naught else but you, your father and I, that
has not been touched by our ill-fortune. Darling, darling—never
forget that you are your father’s dearest joy—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid went back to the winter-room, undressed and
crept into bed beside Ulvhild. She put an arm about the
child and laid her cheek close to the little one’s so that she
felt the warmth of Ulvhild’s body and smelt the keen odour
of her damp hair. Ulvhild slept heavily and soundly, as
she ever did after Lady Aashild’s evening draught. The
lady’s bedstraw, spread beneath the bedding, gave out a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_58">58</span>drowsy scent. None the less did Ragnfrid lie long sleepless,
gazing at the little spot of light in the roof where the
moon shone upon the smoke-hole’s pane of horn.</p>
<p class="c015">Over in the other bed lay Lady Aashild, but Ragnfrid
never knew whether she slept or waked. The Lady never
spoke of their having known each other in former days—this
frightened Ragnfrid. And it seemed to her she had
never known such bitter sorrow and such haunting dread
as now—even though she knew that Lavrans would have his
full health again—and that Ulvhild would live.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">It seemed as though Lady Aashild took pleasure in talking
to Kristin, and with each day that passed the maid became
better friends with her. One day, when they had gone
to gather herbs, they sat together high up the hillside on a
little green, close under the tree. They could look down
into the farm-place at Formo and see Arne Gyrdson’s red
jerkin: he had ridden down the valley with them and was
to look after their horses while they were up the hillside
seeking herbs.</p>
<p class="c015">As they sat, Kristin told Lady Aashild of her meeting
with the dwarf-maiden. She had not thought of it for many
years, but now it rose before her. And while she spoke, the
thought came to her strangely that there was some likeness
betwixt Lady Aashild and the dwarf-lady—though she knew
well all the time they were not really like. But when she
had told all, Lady Aashild sat still a while and looked out
down the Dale; at length she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“You were wise to fly, since you were only a child then.
But have you never heard of folk who took the gold the
dwarfs offered, and after bound the troll in stone?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have heard such tales,” said Kristin, “but I would never
dare to do it. And methinks it is not a fair deed.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis well when one dares not do what one doth not think
a fair deed,” said Lady Aashild, laughing a little. “But
it is not so well when one thinks a thing to be no fair deed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_59">59</span>because one dares not do it.—You have grown much this
summer,” the Lady said of a sudden. “Do you know yourself,
I wonder, that you are like to be fair?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Kristin. “They say I am like my father.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild laughed quietly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye ’twould be best for you if you took after Lavrans
both in mind and body, too. Yet ’twould be pity were they
to wed you up here in the Dale. Plainness and country
ways let no man scorn, but they think, themselves, these big
folk up here, they are so fine that their like is not to be
found in Norway’s land. They wonder much, belike, that I
can live and thrive though they bar their doors against me.
But they are lazy and proud and will not learn new ways—and
they put the blame on the old strife with the King in
Sverre’s days. ’Tis all lies; your mother’s forefather made
friends with King Sverre and received gifts from him; but
were your mother’s brother to become one of our King’s
men and wait upon his Court, he would have to trim himself
up both without and within, and that Trond would
not be at pains to do. But you, Kristin,—you should
be wedded to a man bred in knightly ways and <i>courteisie</i>—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sat looking down into the Formo yard, at Arne’s
red back. She scarce knew it herself, but when Lady
Aashild talked of the world she had once moved in, Kristin
ever thought of the knights and earls in Arne’s likeness.
Before, when she was little, she had always seen them in her
father’s shape.</p>
<p class="c015">“My sister’s son, Erlend Nikulaussön of Husaby, <i>he</i> might
have been a fitting bridegroom for you—he has grown
comely, has the boy. My sister Magnhild looked in on me
last year as she passed through the Dale, and he with her.
Aye ’tis not like you could get him, but I had gladly spread
the coverlid over you two in the bridal bed—he is as dark-haired
as you are fair, and he has goodly eyes.—But if
I know my brother-in-law aright, he has bethought him already
<span class="pageno" id="Page_60">60</span>for sure of a better match for Erlend than you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Am I not a good match then?” asked Kristin wondering.
She had never thought of being hurt by anything Lady
Aashild said, but she felt humbled and sad that the Lady
should be in some way better than her own folks.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, you are a good match,” said the other. “Yet you
could scarce look to come into my kindred. Your forefather
in this land was an outlaw and a stranger, and the
Gjeslings have sat and grown moulded on their farms so
long that soon they’ll be forgotten outside the Dale. But
I and my sister had for husbands the nephews of Queen
Margret Skulesdatter.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin could not even pluck up heart to say it was not
her forefather, but his brother, who had come to the land an
outlaw. She sat and gazed at the dark hillsides across the
dale, and she thought of the day many years gone by, when
she had been up on the upland wastes and seen how many
fells there were twixt her own valley and the outer world.
Then Lady Aashild said they must go home now, and bade
her call on Arne. So Kristin put her hands to her mouth,
and hallooed and waved her kerchief, till she saw the red
spot in the farm-place move and wave back.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Not long after this Lady Aashild went home, but through
the autumn and the first part of the winter, she came often
to Jörundgaard to spend some days with Ulvhild. The
child was taken out of bed in the daytime now, and they
tried to get her to stand, but her legs gave way beneath her
when she put her feet to the ground. She was fretful, white
and weary, and the laced jacket of horsehide and thin withes,
which Lady Aashild had made for her, plagued her sorely,
so that she would rather lie still in her mother’s lap. Ragnfrid
had her sick daughter for ever in her arms, so that
Tordis had the whole care of the house now, and at her
mother’s bidding, Kristin went with Tordis to learn and to
help.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_61">61</span>Kristin longed for Lady Aashild between whiles, and
sometimes the Lady would chat much with her, but at other
times the child would wait in vain for a word beyond the
other’s greeting when she came and when she went—Lady
Aashild sat and talked with the grown-up folk only. That
was always the way when she had her husband with her, for
it happened now at times that Björn Gunnarsön came with
his wife. Lavrans had ridden to Haugen one day in the
autumn to take the Lady her leech’s fee—it was the very
best silver tankard they had in the house, with a plate to
match. He had slept there the night, and ever since he
praised the farm mightily; it was fair and well ordered, and
not so small as folks would have it, he said. And within the
house all spoke of well-being and the customs of the house
were seemly, following the ways of great folks’ houses in the
South. What he thought of Björn, Lavrans said not, but he
welcomed him fairly at all times when he came with his wife
to Jörundgaard. But the Lady Aashild, Lavrans liked exceeding
well, and he said he deemed most of the tales that
had been told of her were lies. He said, too, ’twas most
sure that twenty years since she could have had small need
of witchcraft to bind a man to her—she was near the sixties
now, yet she still looked young and had a most fair and
winning bearing.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin saw well that her mother liked all this but little.
Of Lady Aashild, it is true, Ragnfrid said naught, but once
she likened Björn to the yellow, flattened grass one sometimes
finds growing under big stones, and Kristin thought
this fitted him well. Björn looked strangely faded; he was
somewhat fat, pale and sluggish, and a little bald, although
he was not much older than Lavrans. Yet one saw he had
once been a very comely man. Kristin never came to speech
with him—he spoke little, and was wont to sit in the same
place where he first settled down, from the time he stepped
into the room till he went to bed. He drank hugely, but
one marked it but little on him; he ate scarce any food, but
<span class="pageno" id="Page_62">62</span>gazed now and again at one or another in the room with
a fixed, brooding look in his strange, pale eyes.</p>
<p class="c015">They had seen naught of their kinsfolk at Sundbu since
the mishap befell, though Lavrans had been over at Vaage
more times than one. But Sira Eirik came to Jörundgaard
as before; and there he often met Lady Aashild, and they
were good friends. Folk thought this was good of the
priest, for he was himself a very skilful leech. That, too,
was doubtless one cause why the folk of the great estates
had not sought Lady Aashild’s counsel, at least not openly,
as they held the priest to be skilful enough, nor was it easy
for them to know how they should bear themselves toward
two folks who had been cast off, in a manner, by their
own kin and fellows. Sira Eirik said himself, they did not
graze on one another’s meadows; and as to her witchcraft,
he was not her parish priest—it might well be the lady
knew more than was good for her soul’s health—yet one
must not forget ignorant folk were all too ready to talk of
witchcraft as soon as a woman was a bit wiser than her
neighbours. Lady Aashild, on her side, praised the priest
much and was diligent at church if it chanced she was at
Jörundgaard on a holy day.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Yule-tide was sorrowful that year; Ulvhild could not yet
put her feet to the ground, and they neither heard nor saw
aught of the Sundbu folk. Kristin knew that it was talked
of in the parish and that her father took it to heart. But
her mother seemed to care naught; and Kristin thought
this wrong of her.</p>
<p class="c015">But one evening, toward the end of Yule-tide, came Sira
Sigurd, Trond Gjesling’s house-priest, driving in a great
sledge, and his chief errand was to bid them all to a feast
at Sundbu.</p>
<p class="c015">Sira Sigurd was ill-liked in the parishes about, for it
was he who really managed Trond’s estates—or at the least,
he got the blame for Trond’s hard and unjust dealings,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_63">63</span>and there was no denying Trond was something of a
plague to his tenants. His priest was most learned in writing
and reckoning, versed in the law, and a skilful leech—if
not quite so skilful as he deemed himself. But from his
ways, no one would have thought him over-wise; he often
said foolish things. Ragnfrid and Lavrans had never liked
him, but the Sundbu folk, as was but reason, set great store
by their priest, and both they and he felt very bitter that
he had not been called in to Ulvhild.</p>
<p class="c015">Now by ill-fortune it fell out that when Sira Sigurd came
to Jörundgaard, Lady Aashild and Sir Björn were there
already, besides Sira Eirik, Gyrd and Inga of Finsbrekken,
Arne’s parents, old Jon from Loptsgaard, and a Preaching
Friar from Hamar, Brother Aasgaut.</p>
<p class="c015">While Ragnfrid had the tables spread anew with Christmas
fare, and Lavrans looked into the letters brought by
Sira Sigurd, the priest wished to look at Ulvhild. She was
already abed for the night and sleeping, but Sira Sigurd
woke her, felt her back and limbs, and asked her many
questions, at first gently enough, but then roughly and impatiently
as the child grew frightened—Sigurd was a
little man, all but a dwarf, with a great, flaming, red face.
As he made to lift her out upon the floor to test her feet,
she began screaming loudly. On this Lady Aashild rose,
went to the bed, and covered Ulvhild with the skins, saying
the child was so sleepy she could not have stood upon the
floor even had her legs been strong.</p>
<p class="c015">The priest began then to speak loudly; he too was
reckoned to know somewhat of leech-craft. But Lady Aashild
took him by the hand, brought him forward to the
high-seat and fell to telling him what she had done for
Ulvhild, and asking his judgment on each and every matter.
On this he grew somewhat milder of mood, and ate and
drank of Ragnfrid’s good cheer.</p>
<p class="c015">But as the beer and wine began to mount to his head,
Sira Sigurd’s humour changed again and he grew quarrelsome
<span class="pageno" id="Page_64">64</span>and hotheaded—he knew well enough there was no
one in the room who liked him. First he turned on Gyrd—he
was the bishop of Hamar’s bailiff in Vaage and Sil, and
there had been many quarrels twixt the bishop’s see and
Trond Ivarsön. Gyrd said not much, but Inga was a
fiery woman, and then Brother Aasgaut joined in and
spoke:</p>
<p class="c015">“You should not forget, Sira Sigurd, our reverend Father
Ingjald is your overlord, too—we know enough of you in
Hamar. You wallow in all good things at Sundbu, never
thinking that you are vowed to other work than to do Trond
eyeservice, helping him in all wrong and injustice, to the
peril of his soul and the minishing of the rights of
Holy Church. Have you never heard how it fares with the
false and unruly priests who hatch out devices against
their spiritual fathers and those in authority? Wot you
not of that time when the angels took St. Thomas of Canterbury
to the door of Hell and let him peep in? He wondered
much that he saw none of the priests who had set
themselves up against him, as you have set yourself against
your bishop. He was about to praise God’s mercy, for
the holy man begrudged not salvation to all sinners—but
at that the angel bade the devil lift his tail a little, and out
there came, with a great bang and a foul smell of sulphur,
all the priests and learned men who had wrought against
the good of the church. Thus did he come to know whither
<i>they</i> had gone.”</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>There</i> you lie, monk,” said the priest. “I have heard
that tale too; only they were not priests, but beggar-monks,
who came from the rear of the devil like wasps out of a
wasp-nest.”</p>
<p class="c015">Old Jon laughed louder than all the serving-folk, and
roared:</p>
<p class="c015">“There were both sorts, I’ll be bound—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then the devil must have a fine broad tail,” said Björn
Gunnarsön, and Lady Aashild smiled and said:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_65">65</span>“Aye, have you not heard that all evil drags a long tail
behind it?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Be still, Lady Aashild,” cried Sira Sigurd, “do not
you talk of the long tail evil drags after it. You sit here
as though <i>you</i> were mistress in the house, and not Ragnfrid.
But ’tis strange you could not help her child—have you no
more of that strong water you dealt in once, which could
make whole the sheep already boiling in the pot, and turn
women to maids in the bridal bed? Think you I know not
of the wedding in this very parish where you made a bath
for the bride that was no maid—”</p>
<p class="c015">Sira Eirik sprang up, gripped the other priest by the
shoulder and thigh, and flung him right over the table, so
that the jugs and tankards were overturned and food and
drink ran upon the cloths and floor, while Sira Sigurd lay
his length upon the ground with torn garments. Eirik
leaped over the board, and would have struck him again,
roaring above the tumult:</p>
<p class="c015">“Hold your filthy mouth, priest of Hell that you are—”
Lavrans strove to part them, but Ragnfrid stood, white as
death, by the board, and wrung her hands. Then Lady
Aashild ran and helped Sira Sigurd to his feet, and wiped
the blood from his face. She poured a beaker of mead
down his throat, saying:</p>
<p class="c015">“You must not be so strict, Sira Eirik, that you cannot
bear to listen to jesting so far on in a drinking bout. Seat
yourselves now and you shall hear of that wedding. ’Twas
not here in the Dale at all, nor had I the good fortune to be
the one that knew of that water—could I have brewed it I
trow we would not be sitting now on a hill-croft in the
wilds. I might have been a rich woman and had lands in
the great, rich parishes—nigh to town and cloisters and
bishop and chapter,” and she smiled at the three churchmen.
“But ’tis said sure enough, that the art was known in the
olden days.”</p>
<p class="c015">And the Lady told a merry tale of a misadventure that befell
<span class="pageno" id="Page_66">66</span>in King Inga’s time when the magic wash was used by
mistake by the wrong woman and of what followed thereon.</p>
<p class="c015">Great was the laughter in the room, and both Gyrd and
Jon shouted for more such tales from Lady Aashild. But
the Lady said no: “Here sit two priests and Brother
Aasgaut and young lads and serving maids; ’tis best we
cease before the talk grows unseemly and gross; let us bear
in mind ’tis a holy day.”</p>
<p class="c015">The men made an outcry, but the women held with Lady
Aashild. No one saw that Ragnfrid had left the room.
Soon after it was time that Kristin, who sat lowest on the
women’s bench among the serving maids, should go to
bed—she was sleeping in Tordis’ house, there were so many
guests at the manor.</p>
<p class="c015">It was biting cold, and the northern-lights flamed and
flickered over the brows of the fells to the north. The
snow crackled under Kristin’s feet as she ran over the
courtyard shivering, her arms crossed on her breast.</p>
<p class="c015">Then she was aware of a woman in the shadow of the old
loft walking hurriedly to and fro in the snow, throwing her
arms about, wringing her hands, and wailing aloud. Kristin
saw it was her mother, and ran to her affrighted, asking
if she were ill.</p>
<p class="c015">“No, no,” burst out Ragnfrid. “But I could not stay
within—go you to bed, child.”</p>
<p class="c015">As Kristin turned away her mother called her softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Go back to the room and lie beside your father and
Ulvhild—take her in your arms so that he may not roll
upon her by mischance; he sleeps so heavily when he
has drunk deep. I am going up to sleep in the old loft-room
to-night.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus, mother,” said Kristin, “you will freeze to death
if you lie there—alone, too. And what think you father
will say if you come not to bed to-night?”</p>
<p class="c015">“He will not mark it,” answered her mother, “he was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_67">67</span>all but asleep when I left, and to-morrow he will waken
late. Go and do as I have said.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twill be so cold for you,” said Kristin, whimpering,
but her mother sent her away, a little more kindly, and
shut herself into the loft-room.</p>
<p class="c015">Within it was as cold as without, and it was pitch-dark.
Ragnfrid groped her way to the bed, pulled off her headdress,
undid her shoes, and crept in among the skins.
They chilled her to the bone; it was like sinking into a
snowdrift. She pulled the skins over her head, and drew
her knees up to her chin, and thrust her hands into her
bosom—so she lay and wept; now quite low, with flowing
tears; now crying aloud and grinding her teeth. But
in time she had warmed the bed around her so much that
she grew drowsy, and at last wept herself to sleep.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">5</h3>
<p class="c017">The year that Kristin was fifteen in the spring, Lavrans
Björgulfsön and Sir Andres Gudmundsön of Dyfrin
made tryst at the Holledis Thing. There ’twas agreed
between them that Andres’ second son, Simon, should
wed Kristin Lavransdatter and should have Formo, Sir
Andres’ mother’s udal estate. This the two men shook
hands upon; yet it was not put in writing, for Sir Andres
had first to settle with his other children about
their heritage. And for this reason no betrothal
feast was held; but Sir Andres and Simon came to
Jörundgaard to see the bride, and Lavrans gave them a
great banquet.</p>
<p class="c015">By this time Lavrans had ready his new dwelling-house
of two storeys, with corner fire-places of masonry both
in the living room and the loft-room above richly furnished
and adorned with fair wood-carvings. He had rebuilt
<span class="pageno" id="Page_68">68</span>the old loft-room too, and bettered the other houses
in many ways, so that he was now housed as befitted an
esquire bearing arms. He was very wealthy now, for he
had had good fortune in his undertakings and was a
shrewd and careful husband of his goods; above all was
he known as a breeder of the finest horses and the goodliest
cattle of all kinds. And now he had been able so to order
things that his daughter was to wed into the Dyfrin kindred
and the Formo estate, all folks deemed he had
brought to a happy end his purpose to be the foremost
man in the country-side. He, and Ragnfrid too, were well
pleased with the betrothal, as were Sir Andres and
Simon.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was a little cast down when she first saw Simon
Andressön; for she had heard great talk of his good looks
and seemly bearing, so that she had outrun all measure
in her hopes of what her bridegroom would be.</p>
<p class="c015">Truly Simon was well-favoured, but he was something
fat to be only twenty years of age; he was short of neck and
had a face as round and shining as the moon. He had
goodly hair, brown and curly, and his eyes were grey and
clear, but lay deep and as it were shut in, the lids
were so fat; his nose was over small and his mouth was
small too, and pouting, but not unsightly. In spite of his
stoutness, he was light, and quick, and nimble in all his
ways, and was skilled in all sports. He was something
too brisk and forward in his speech, but Lavrans held he
showed both good wit and learning when he talked with
older men.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid soon came to like him, and Ulvhild was taken
at once with the greatest love for him—he was more
gentle and kind with the little sick maid than with any
other. And when Kristin had grown used a little to his
round face and his way of speech, she grew to be well content
with her betrothed, and happy in the way her father
had ordered things for her.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_69">69</span>Lady Aashild was at the feast. Since Jörundgaard had
opened its doors to her, the great folk in the parishes
round about had begun to call to mind her high birth
and to think less of her doubtful fame, so that the Lady
came much out among people. She said when she had
seen Simon:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis a good match, Kristin; this Simon will go forward
in the world—you will be spared many cares, and he will
be good to live with. But to my mind he seems something
too fat and too cheerful—Were it now in Norway as
it was in days gone by, and as it is still in other lands—that
folk were not more hard to sinners than is God himself,
I would say you should find yourself a friend who
is lean and sorrowful—one you could have to sit and
hold converse with. Then would I say, you could not fare
better than you would with Simon.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin grew red, though she understood not well what
the Lady’s words might mean. But as time went on and
her bridal chests filled and she evermore heard talk of
her wedding and of what she was to take in to the new
household, she began to long that the betrothal-knot should
be tied once for all, and that Simon should come north;
thus she thought much about him in the end and was glad
at the thought of meeting him again.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Kristin was full-grown now and very fair to look
upon. She was most like her father and had grown tall;
she was small waisted, with slender, fine limbs and joints,
yet round and plump withal. Her face was somewhat
short and round, her forehead low and broad and white
as milk; her eyes large, grey and soft, under fairly drawn
eyebrows. Her mouth was something large, but it had
full bright, red lips, and her chin was round as an apple
and well shaped. She had goodly long, thick hair; but
’twas something dark in hue, almost as much brown as
yellow, and quite straight. Lavrans liked nothing better
<span class="pageno" id="Page_70">70</span>than to hear Sira Eirik boast of Kristin—the priest
had seen the maid grow up, had taught her her books and
writing, and loved her much. But the father was not so
pleased when the priest sometimes likened his daughter
to an unblemished, silken-coated filly.</p>
<p class="c015">Yet all men said that had not that sorrowful mishap
befallen, Ulvhild had been many times more comely than
her sister. She had the fairest and sweetest face, white
and red as lilies and roses; and light-yellow hair, soft
as silk, which waved and clung about her slender throat
and small shoulders. Her eyes were like those of her
Gjesling kin; they were deep set, under straight, dark
brows, and were clear as water and grey-blue; but her
glance was mild, not sharp like theirs. Then too, the
child’s voice was so clear and lovely that it was a joy
to hearken to her, whether she spoke or sang. She was
most apt at book-learning and all kinds of string-instruments
and draughts, but had little mind to work with her
hands, for her back soon grew weary.</p>
<p class="c015">There seemed little hope, indeed, this fair child should
ever have full use of her limbs. It is true she had mended
a little after her father and mother had been to Nidaros
with her to St. Olav’s shrine. Lavrans and Ragnfrid had
gone thither on foot, without man or serving-maid to attend
them; they bore the child between them on a litter
the whole way. After the journey Ulvhild grew so far well
that she could walk a little with a crutch. But they could
not hope that she should grow well enough to be wedded,
and so it was like that, when the time came, she must be
given to a cloister with all the wealth that should fall to
her.</p>
<p class="c015">They never spoke of this, and Ulvhild herself scarce
knew how much unlike she was to other children. She
was very fond of finery and pretty clothes, and her father
and mother had not the heart to deny her anything; so
Ragnfrid stitched and sewed for her and decked her out
<span class="pageno" id="Page_71">71</span>like any king’s child. Once some pedlars passing through
the parish lay overnight at Laugarbru; and Ulvhild got
a sight of their wares there. They had some amber coloured
silk-stuff, and she set her heart on having a shift
of it. Lavrans was not wont to deal with such folk, who
went around against the law, selling wares from the market-towns
in the country parishes; but now he bought the
whole bale at once. He gave Kristin some of the stuff,
too, for a bridal shift, and she was sewing on it this summer.
Until now all the shifts she owned had been of wool,
or of linen for best wear. But now Ulvhild had a shift
of silk for feast days and a Sunday shift of linen with
silk let in above.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans Björgulfsön owned Laugarbru too now, and
Tordis and Jon were in charge there. With them was
Lavrans’ and Ragnfrid’s youngest daughter, Ramborg,
whom Tordis had nursed. Ragnfrid would scarce look at
the child for some time after it was born, for she said she
brought her children ill-fortune. Yet she loved the little
maid much and was ever sending gifts to her and Tordis;
and later she went often over to Laugarbru and saw Ramborg,
but she liked best to come after the child was asleep,
and sit by her. Lavrans and the two older daughters were
often at Laugarbru to play with the little one; she was
a strong and healthy child, but not so fair as her sisters.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">This was the last summer Arne Gyrdsön was on Jörundgaard.
The bishop had promised Gyrd to help the youth
on in the world, and in the autumn Arne was to set out
for Hamar.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin knew well enough that she was dear to Arne,
but she was in many ways still a child in mind and she
thought little about it, but bore herself to him as she had
always done from the time they were children; was with
him as often as she could, and always stood up with him
when there was dancing at home or upon the church-green.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_72">72</span>That her mother did not like this, seemed to her something
of a jest. But she never spoke to Arne of Simon or of her
wedding, for she marked that he grew heavy-hearted when
there was talk of it.</p>
<p class="c015">Arne was a very handy man and was now making Kristin
a sewing-chair as a keepsake. He had covered both the
box and the frame of the chair with fair, rich carving,
and was now busy in the smithy on iron bands and lock
for it. On a fine evening well on in summer Kristin had
gone down to him. She had taken with her a jacket of
her father’s she had to mend, and sat upon the stone threshold
sewing while she chatted with the youth in the smithy.
Ulvhild was with her; she hopped about upon her crutch,
eating the raspberries which grew among the heaps of stone
around the field.</p>
<p class="c015">After a while Arne came to the smithy door to cool himself.
He made as though to seat himself beside Kristin,
but she moved a little away and bade him have a care not to
dirty the sewing she had upon her knee.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it come to this between us,” said Arne, “that you dare
not let me sit by you for fear the peasant boy should soil
you?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked at him in wonder, and answered:</p>
<p class="c015">“You know well enough what I meant. But take your
apron off, wash the charcoal from your hands and sit down
a little and rest you here by me—” and she made room
for him.</p>
<p class="c015">But Arne laid himself in the grass in front of her; then
she said again:</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, be not angry, my Arne. Can you think I could
be unthankful for the brave gift you are making me, or ever
forget you have been my best friend at home here all my
days?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have I been that?” he asked.</p>
<p class="c015">“You know it well,” said Kristin. “And never will I
<span class="pageno" id="Page_73">73</span>forget you. But you, who are to go out into the world—maybe
you will gain wealth and honor or ever you think—you
will like enough forget me, long before I forget you—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You will never forget me?” said Arne, smiling. “And
I will forget you ere you forget me?—you are naught but
a child, Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>You</i> are not so old either,” she replied.</p>
<p class="c015">“I am as old as Simon Darre,” said he again. “And we
bear helm and shield as well as the Dyfrin folk, but my
folks have not had fortune with them—”</p>
<p class="c015">He had dried his hands on the grass tufts; and now he
took Kristin’s ankle and pressed his cheek to the foot which
showed from under her dress. She would have drawn away
her foot, but Arne said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Your mother is at Laugarbru, and Lavrans has ridden
forth—from the houses none can see us where we sit.
Surely you can let me speak this once of what is in my
heart.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin answered:</p>
<p class="c015">“We have known all our days, both you and I, that ’twas
bootless for us to set our hearts on each other.”</p>
<p class="c015">“May I lay my head in your lap,” said Arne, and as she
did not answer, he laid his head down and twined an arm
about her waist. With his other hand he pulled at the plaits
of her hair.</p>
<p class="c015">“How will you like it,” he asked in a little, “when Simon
lies in your lap thus, and plays with your hair?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin did not answer. It seemed as though a heaviness
fell upon her of a sudden—Arne’s words and Arne’s head
on her knee—it seemed to her as though a door opened into
a room, where many dark passages led into a greater darkness;
sad, and heavy at heart, she faltered and would not
look inside.</p>
<p class="c015">“Wedded folk do not use to do so,” said she of a sudden,
quickly, as if eased of a weight. She tried to see Simon’s
<span class="pageno" id="Page_74">74</span>fat round face looking up into hers as Arne was looking
now; she heard his voice—and she could not keep from
laughing:</p>
<p class="c015">“I trow Simon will never lie on the ground to play with
my shoes—not he!”</p>
<p class="c015">“No, for he can play with you in his bed,” said Arne.
His voice made her feel sick and powerless all at once.
She tried to push his head from off her lap, but he pressed
it against her knee and said softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“But <i>I</i> would play with your shoes and your hair and
your fingers, and follow you out and in the livelong day,
Kristin, were you ever so much my wife and slept in my
arms each single night.”</p>
<p class="c015">He half sat up, put his arm round her shoulder and gazed
into her eyes.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not well done of you to talk thus to me,” said
Kristin bashfully, in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Arne. He rose and stood before her. “But
tell me one thing—would you not rather it were I—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh! I would rather—,” she sat still a while. “I
would rather not have any man—not yet—”</p>
<p class="c015">Arne did not move, but said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Would you rather be given to the cloister then, as ’tis
to be with Ulvhild, and be a maid all your days?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin pressed her folded hands down into her lap. A
strange, sweet trembling seized her—and with a sudden
shudder she seemed to understand how much her little sister
was to be pitied—her eyes filled with tears of sorrow for
Ulvhild’s sake.</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin,” said Arne in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">At that moment a loud scream came from Ulvhild. Her
crutch had caught between the stones, and she had fallen.
Arne and Kristin ran to her, and Arne lifted her up into
her sister’s arms. She had cut her mouth and much blood
was flowing from the hurt.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sat down with her in the smithy door, and Arne
<span class="pageno" id="Page_75">75</span>fetched water in a wooden bowl. Together they set to
washing and wiping her face. She had rubbed the skin off
her knees, too. Kristin bent tenderly over the small, thin
legs.</p>
<p class="c015">Ulvhild’s wailing soon grew less, but she wept silently
and bitterly as children do who are used to suffering pain.
Kristin held her head to her bosom and rocked her gently.</p>
<p class="c015">Then the bell began to ring for Vespers up at Olav’s-Church.</p>
<p class="c015">Arne spoke to Kristin, but she sat bent over her sister as
though she neither heard nor marked him, so that at last
he grew afraid and asked if she thought there was danger in
the hurt. Kristin shook her head, but looked not at him.</p>
<p class="c015">Soon after she got up and went towards the farmstead,
bearing Ulvhild in her arms. Arne followed, silent and
troubled—Kristin seemed so deep in thought, and her face
was set and hard. As she walked, the bell went on ringing
out over the meadows and the dale; it was still ringing as
she went into the house.</p>
<p class="c015">She laid Ulvhild in the bed which the sisters had shared
ever since Kristin had grown too big to sleep by her father
and mother. She slipped her shoes off and lay down beside
the little one,—lay and listened for the ringing of the
bell long after it was hushed and the child slept.</p>
<p class="c015">It had come to her as the bell began to ring, while she
sat with Ulvhild’s little bleeding face in her hands, that
maybe it was a sign to her. If she should go to convent in
her sister’s stead—if she should vow herself to the service
of God and the Virgin Mary—might not God give the child
health and strength again?</p>
<p class="c015">She thought of Brother Edwin’s word: that nowadays
’twas only marred and crippled children and those for whom
good husbands could not be found that their fathers and
mothers gave to God. She knew her father and mother
were godly folks—yet had she never heard aught else but
that she should wed—but when they understood that Ulvhild
<span class="pageno" id="Page_76">76</span>would be sickly all her days they planned for her straightway
that she should go to the cloister—</p>
<p class="c015">And she had no mind to go herself—she strove against
the thought that God would do a miracle for Ulvhild if she
herself turned nun. She hung on Sira Eirik’s word that
in these days not many miracles come to pass. And yet
she felt this evening it was as Brother Edwin said; had a
man but faith enough, his faith might work miracles. But
she had no mind to have that faith herself, she did not love
God and his Mother and the Saints <i>so</i> much, did not even
wish to love them so—she loved the world and longed for
the world—</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin pressed her lips down into Ulvhild’s soft, silken
hair. The child slept soundly, and the elder sister sat up
restlessly, but lay down again. Her heart bled with sorrow
and shame, but she knew she did not wish to believe in signs
and wonders, for she would not give up her heritage of
health and beauty and love.</p>
<p class="c015">So she tried to comfort herself with the thought, that her
father and mother would not be willing she should do such
a thing. Nor would they think it could avail. Then, too,
she was promised already, and she was sure they would not
give up Simon of whom they were so fond. She felt it a
betrayal of herself that they were so proud of this son-in-law;
of a sudden she thought with dislike of Simon’s round,
red face and small laughing eyes—of his jaunty gait—he
bounced like a ball, it came to her all at once—; of his
bantering talk, that made her feel awkward and foolish.
’Twas no such glory either to get him, and move with him
just down to Formo—Still she would rather have him
than be sent to convent—But, ah! the world beyond the
hills, the King’s palace and the earls and knights Lady
Aashild talked of—and a comely man with sorrowful eyes
who would follow her in and out and never grow weary.
She thought of Arne that summer day when he lay on his
side and slept with his brown, glossy hair outspread among
<span class="pageno" id="Page_77">77</span>the heather—she had loved him then as though he were her
brother. It was not well done of him to have spoken to
her so, when he knew they could never belong to one another—</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Word came from Laugarbru that her mother would stay
there overnight. Kristin got up to undress and go to rest.
She began to unlace her dress—then she put her shoes on
again, threw her cloak about her and went out.</p>
<p class="c015">The night sky stretched clear and green above the hillcrests.
It was near time for the moon to rise, and where
it was yet hid behind the fell, sailed some small clouds,
their lower edges shining like silver; the sky grew brighter
and brighter, like metal under gathering drops of dew.</p>
<p class="c015">She ran up between the fences, over the road, and up the
slope toward the church. It stood there, as though asleep,
dark and shut, but she went up to the cross which stood near
by to mark the place where St. Olav once rested as he fled
before his enemies.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin knelt down upon the stone and laid her folded
hands upon the base of the cross: “Holy Cross, strongest
of masts, fairest of trees, bridge for the sick to the fair
shores of health—”</p>
<p class="c015">At the words of the prayer, it was as if her longing
widened out and faded little by little like rings on a pool.
The single thoughts that troubled her smoothed themselves
out one after the other, her mind grew calmer, more tender,
and there came upon her a gentle, vague sadness in place
of her distress.</p>
<p class="c015">She lay kneeling there and drank in all the sounds of the
night. The wind sighed strangely, the rushing sound of
the river came from beyond the wood by the church, the
beck ran near by right across the road—and all about, far
and near, in the dark, she half saw and heard small rills
of running and dripping water. The river gleamed white
down below in the valley. The moon crept up in a little
<span class="pageno" id="Page_78">78</span>nick in the hills—the dewy leaves and stones sparkled
faintly, and the newly tarred timber of the belfry shone dull
and dark by the churchyard gate. Then the moon was hid
once more where the mountain ridge rose higher, and now
many more white and shining clouds floated in the sky.</p>
<p class="c015">She heard a horse coming at a slow pace from higher up
the road, and the sound of men’s voices speaking low and
even. She had no fear of folk here close at home where
she knew everyone—so she felt quite safe.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father’s dogs rushed at her, turned and dashed back
into the wood, then turned back and leaped upon her again.
Her father shouted a greeting as he came out from among
the birches. He was leading Guldsveinen by the bridle;
a brace or two of birds hung dangling from the saddle, and
Lavrans bore a hooded hawk upon his left wrist. He had
with him a tall, bent man in a monk’s frock, and even before
Kristin had seen his face she knew it was Brother Edwin.
She went to meet them, wondering no more than if it had
been a dream—she only smiled when Lavrans asked whether
she knew their guest again.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans had chanced upon him up by the Rost bridge, and
had coaxed him home with him to spend the night. But
Brother Edwin would have it they must let him lie in an
outhouse: “For I’m grown so lousy,” said he, “you cannot
put me in the good beds.”</p>
<p class="c015">And for all Lavrans talked and begged, the monk held
out; nay, at first he would have it they should give him his
food out in the courtyard. But at last they got him into the
hall with them, and Kristin made up the fire in the fireplace
in the corner and set candles on the board, while a serving-maid
brought in meat and drink.</p>
<p class="c015">The monk seated himself on the beggars’ bench by the
door, and would have naught but cold porridge and water
for his supper. Neither would he have aught of Lavrans’
proffer to have a bath made ready for him and have his
clothes well washed.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_79">79</span>Brother Edwin fidgeted and scratched himself, and
laughed all over his lean, old face.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, nay,” said he, “these things bite into my proud
hide better than either whips or the Gardian’s words. I
have been sitting under a rock up here among the fells all
summer—they gave me leave to go out into the wilderness
to fast and pray, and there I sat and thought: now was I like
a holy hermit indeed; and the poor folk away in Setnadal
came up with food for me, and thought here they saw, in
very truth, a godly and clean-living monk. Brother Edwin,
they said, were there many such monks as you, we would be
better men fast enough; but when we see priests and bishops
and monks biting and fighting like young swine in a
trough—Aye, I told them it was unchristian-like to talk
so—but I liked to hear it well enough, and I sang and I
prayed till the mountain rang again. Now will it be wholesome
for me to feel the lice biting and fighting upon my
skin, and to hear the good housewives, who would have all
clean and seemly in their houses, cry out: that dirty pig of
a monk can lie out in the barn well enough now ’tis summer.
I am for northwards now to Nidaros for St. Olav’s Vigil,
and ’twill be well for me to mark that folk are none too
fain to come nigh me—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ulvhild woke, and Lavrans went and lifted her up and
wrapped her in his cloak:</p>
<p class="c015">“Here is the child I spoke of, dear Father. Lay your
hands upon her and pray to God for her as you prayed for
the boy away north in Meldal, who we heard got his health
again—”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk lifted Ulvhild’s chin gently and looked into
her face. And then he raised one of her hands and kissed
it.</p>
<p class="c015">“Pray rather, you and your wife, Lavrans Björgulfsön,
that you be not tempted to try and bend God’s will concerning
this child. Our Lord Jesus himself has set these small
feet upon the path which will lead her most surely to the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_80">80</span>home of peace—I see it by your eyes, you blessed Ulvhild,
you have your intercessors in our second home.”</p>
<p class="c015">“The boy in Meldal got well, I have heard,” said Lavrans,
in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“He was a poor widow’s only child, and there was none
but the parish to feed or clothe him when his mother should
be gone. And yet the woman prayed only that God might
give her a fearless heart so that she might have faith. He
would bring that to pass which would be best for the lad.
Naught else did I do but join in that prayer of hers.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis hard for her mother and for me to rest content
with this,” answered Lavrans heavily. “The more that she
is so fair and so good.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you seen the child at Lidstad, south in the Dale,”
asked the monk. “Would you rather your daughter had
been like that?”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans shuddered and pressed the child close to him.</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you not,” said Brother Edwin again, “that in God’s
eyes we are all children he has cause to grieve for, crippled
as we are with sin? And yet we deem not we are so badly
off in this world.”</p>
<p class="c015">He went to the picture of the Virgin Mary upon the wall,
and all knelt down while he said the evening prayer. It
seemed to them that Brother Edwin had given them good
comfort.</p>
<p class="c015">But, none the less, after he had gone from the room to
seek his place of rest, Astrid, the head serving-wench, swept
with care all parts of the floor where the monk had stood,
and cast the sweepings at once into the fire.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Next morning Kristin rose early, took milk-porridge and
wheat-cakes in a goodly dish of flame-grained birchwood—for
she knew that the monk never touched meat—and herself
bore the food out to him. But few of the folk were
yet about in the houses.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin stood upon the bridge of the cow-house,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_81">81</span>ready for the road with staff and scrip; with a smile he
thanked Kristin for her pains, and sat himself down on the
grass and ate, while Kristin sat at his feet.</p>
<p class="c015">Her little white dog came running up, the little bells
on his collar tinkling. She took him into her lap, and
Brother Edwin snapped his fingers at him, threw small bits
of wheat-cake into his mouth, and praised him mightily the
while.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis a breed Queen Euphemia brought to the country,”
said he. “You are passing fine here on Jörundgaard now;
both in great things and small.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin flushed with pleasure. She knew already the
dog was of a fine breed, and she was proud of having it;
no one else in the parish had a lapdog. But she had not
known it was of the same kind as the Queen’s pet dogs.</p>
<p class="c015">“Simon Andressön sent him to me,” said she, and pressed
it to her, while it licked her face. “His name is Kortelin.”</p>
<p class="c015">She had thought to speak to the monk about her trouble
and to pray for his counsel. But she had no longer any
wish to let her mind dwell on the thoughts of the past evening.
Brother Edwin was sure God would turn all things
to the best for Ulvhild. And it was good of Simon to send
her such a gift before even their betrothal was fixed. Arne
she would not think of—he had not borne himself as he
should towards her, she thought.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin took his staff and scrip, and bade Kristin
greet those within the house—he would not stay till folk
were up, but go while the day was yet cool. She went with
him up past the church and a little way into the wood.</p>
<p class="c015">When they parted he wished her God’s peace, and
blessed her.</p>
<p class="c015">“Give me a word, like the word you gave to Ulvhild, dear
Father,” begged Kristin, as she stood with his hand in hers.
The monk rubbed his naked foot, knotted with gout, in the
wet grass:</p>
<p class="c015">“Then would I bid you, daughter, that you lay to heart
<span class="pageno" id="Page_82">82</span>how God cares for folks’ good here in the Dale. Little
rain falls here, but he has given you water from the fells,
and the dew freshens meadow and field each night. Thank
God for the good gifts he has given you, and murmur not
if you seem to miss aught you think might well be added to
you. You have bonny yellow hair; see you fret not because
it does not curl. Have you not heard of the old wife who
sat and wept for that she had only a small bite of swine’s
flesh to give to her seven little ones for Christmas cheer.
Pat at the moment St. Olav came riding by, and he stretched
out his hand over the meat and prayed that God might give
the poor little ravens their fill. But when the woman saw
a whole pig’s carcase lying upon the board, she wept that
she had not pots and platters enow!”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin ran homewards with Kortelin dancing at her heels,
snapping at the hem of her dress, and barking and ringing
all his little silver bells.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">6</h3>
<p class="c017">ARNE stayed at home at Finsbrekken the last days before
he was to set out for Hamar; his mother and sisters
were making ready his clothes.</p>
<p class="c015">The day before he was to ride southward, he came to
Jörundgaard to bid farewell. And he made a chance to
whisper to Kristin, would she meet him on the road south of
Laugarbru next evening?</p>
<p class="c015">“I would so fain we two should be alone the last time we
are together,” said he. “Does it seem such a great thing
that I ask—after all, we were brought up together like
brother and sister,” he said when Kristin hung doubtful
a little before making reply.</p>
<p class="c015">So she promised to come, if she could slip away from
home.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_83">83</span>It snowed next morning, but through the day it turned to
rain, and soon roads and fields were a sea of grey mud.
Wreaths of mist hung and drifted along the lower hillsides;
now and then they sank yet lower and gathered into
white rollers along the roots of the hills; and then the
thick rain-clouds closed in again.</p>
<p class="c015">Sira Eirik came over to help Lavrans draw up some deeds.
They went down to the hearth-room, for in such weather it
was pleasanter there than in the great hall, where the fireplace
filled the room with smoke. Ragnfrid was at Laugarbru,
where Ramborg was now getting better of a fever she
had caught early in the autumn.</p>
<p class="c015">Thus it was not hard for Kristin to slip away unseen,
but she dared not take a horse, so she went on foot. The
road was a quagmire of snow-slush and withered leaves;
there was a saddening breath of death and decay in the raw,
chill air, and now and again there came a gust of wind
driving the rain into her face. She drew her hood well
down over her head and, holding her cloak about her with
both hands, went quickly forward. She was a little
afraid—the roar of the river sounded so hollow in the
heavy air, and the clouds drove dark and ragged over the
hill-crests. Now and again she halted and listened for
Arne’s coming.</p>
<p class="c015">After a time she heard the splashing of hoofs upon the
slushy road behind her, and she stopped then where she
was, for this was a somewhat lonely spot and she thought
’twas a good place for them to say their farewells, in
quiet. Almost at once she saw the horseman coming, and
Arne sprang from his horse and led it as he came to meet
her.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas kindly done of you to come,” said he, “in this
ugly weather.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis worse for you who have so far to ride—and how is
it you set out so late?” she asked.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_84">84</span>“Jon has bidden me to lie the night at Loptsgaard,”
answered Arne. “I thought ’twas easier for you to meet
me at this time of day.”</p>
<p class="c015">They stood silent for a time. Kristin thought she had
never seen before how fair a youth Arne was. He had on a
smooth, steel cap, and under that a brown woollen hood
that sat tight about his face and spread out over his shoulders;
under it his narrow face showed bright and comely.
His leather jerkin was old, spotted with rust, and rubbed by
the coat of mail which had been worn above it—Arne had
taken it over from his father—but it fitted closely to his
slim, lithe, and powerful body, and he had a sword at his
side and in his hand a spear—his other weapons hung from
his saddle. He was full-grown now and bore himself manfully.</p>
<p class="c015">She laid her hand upon his shoulder and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you, Arne you asked me once if I thought you as
good a man as Simon Andressön? Now will I tell you one
thing, before we part; ’tis that you seem to me as much
above him in looks and bearing as he is reckoned above
you in birth and riches by those who look most to such
things.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Why do you tell me this?” asked Arne breathlessly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Because Brother Edwin told me to lay to heart, that we
should thank God for his good gifts, and not be like the
woman when St. Olav added to her meat, and she wept
because she had not trenchers to put it in—so you should
not grieve that He has not given you as much of riches as
of bodily gifts—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Was it <i>that</i> you meant?” said Arne. And then, as she
was silent, he said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I wondered if you meant that you would rather be
wedded to me than to the other—”</p>
<p class="c015">“That I would, truly,” said she in a low voice. “—I
know you better—”</p>
<p class="c015">Arne threw his arms around her so that her feet were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_85">85</span>lifted from the ground. He kissed her face many times,
and then set her down again:</p>
<p class="c015">“God help us, Kristin, what a child you are!”</p>
<p class="c015">She stood and hung her head, but left her hands upon his
shoulders. He caught her wrists and held them tight:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see how ’tis with you, my sweeting; you little know
how sore I am at heart to lose you. Kristin, you know we
have grown up together like two apples on one branch; I
loved you long before I began to understand that one day
another would come and break you from me. As sure as
God suffered death for us all—I know not how I can ever
be happy in this world after to-day—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin wept bitterly and lifted her face, so that he might
kiss her.</p>
<p class="c015">“Do not talk so, my Arne,” she begged, and patted him
on the shoulder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin,” said Arne in a low voice and took her into his
arms again, “think you not that if you begged your father—Lavrans
is so good a man, he would not force you against
your will—if you begged them but to let you wait a few
years—no one knows how fortune may turn for me—we
are both of us so young.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, I fear I must do as they wish at home,” she wept.
And now weeping came upon Arne too.</p>
<p class="c015">“You know not, Kristin, how dear you are to me.” He
hid his face upon her shoulder. “If you did, and if you
cared for me, for sure you would go to Lavrans and beg
hard—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot do it,” she sobbed. “I could never come to
love any man so much as to go against my father and
mother for his sake.” She groped with her hands for his
face under the hood and the heavy steel cap. “Do not cry
so, Arne, my dearest friend—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You must take this at least,” said he after a time,
giving her a little brooch; “and think of me sometimes,
for I shall never forget you nor my grief—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_86">86</span>It was all dark when Kristin and Arne had said their
last farewell. She stood and looked after him when at
length he rode away. A streak of yellow light shone
through a rift in the clouds, and was reflected in the footprints,
where they had walked and stood in the slush on
the road—it all looked so cold and sorrowful, she thought.
She drew up her linen neckerchief and dried her tear-stained
face, then turned and went homeward.</p>
<p class="c015">She was wet and cold and walked quickly. After a
time she heard someone coming along the road behind
her. She was a little frightened; even on such a night
as this there might be strange folk journeying on the highway,
and she had a lonely stretch before her. A great
black scree rose right up on one side, and on the other
the ground fell steeply and there was fir-forest all the
way down to the leaden-hued river in the bottom of the
dale. So she was glad when the man behind her called
to her by name; and she stood still and waited.</p>
<p class="c015">The newcomer was a tall, thin man in a dark surcoat
with lighter sleeves—as he came nearer she saw he was
dressed as a priest and carried an empty wallet on his
back. And now she knew him to be Bentein Priestson, as
they called him—Sira Eirik’s daughter’s son. She saw at
once that he was far gone in drink.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, one goes and another comes,” said he, laughing,
when they had greeted one another. “I met Arne of Brekken
even now—I see you are weeping. You might as
well smile a little now I am come home—we have been
friends too ever since we were children, have we not?”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis an ill exchange, methinks, getting you into the
parish in his stead,” said Kristin, bluntly. She had never
liked Bentein. “And so, I fear, will many think. Your
grandfather here has been so glad you were in Oslo making
such a fair beginning.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, aye,” said Bentein, with a nickering laugh. “So
’twas a fair beginning I was making, you think? I was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_87">87</span>even like a pig in a wheat-field, Kristin—and the end was
the same, I was hunted out with cudgels and the hue and
cry. Aye, aye; aye, aye.   ’Tis no great thing, the gladness
my grandfather gets from his offspring. But what a
mighty hurry you are in!”</p>
<p class="c015">“I am cold,” said Kristin, curtly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Not colder than I,” said the priest. “I have no more
clothes on me than you see here—my cloak I had to sell
for food and beer in little Hamar. Now, you should still
have some heat in your body from making your farewells
with Arne—methinks you should let me get under your
fur with you—,” and he caught her cloak, pulled it over
his shoulders and gripped her round the waist with his wet
arm.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was so amazed with his boldness it was a moment
before she could gather her wits—then she strove to
tear herself away, but he had a hold of her cloak and it
was fastened together by a strong silver clasp. Bentein
got his arms about her again, and made to kiss her, his
mouth nearly touching her chin. She tried to strike, but
he held her fast by the upper arm.</p>
<p class="c015">“I trow you have lost your wits,” she hissed, as she
struggled, “dare you to lay hands on me as I were a—dearly
shall you rue this to-morrow, dastard that you
are—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, to-morrow you will not be so foolish,” says Bentein,
putting his leg in front of her so that she half fell
into the mud, and pressing one hand over her mouth.</p>
<p class="c015">Yet she had no thought of crying out. Now for the first
time it flashed on her mind what he dared to want with
her, but rage came upon her so wild and furious she had
scarce a thought of fear: she snarled like an animal at
grips with another, and fought furiously with the man as
he tried to hold her down, while the ice-cold snow-water
soaked through her clothes on to her burning skin.</p>
<p class="c015">“To-morrow you will have wit enough to hold your
<span class="pageno" id="Page_88">88</span>tongue,” said Bentein, “—and if it can not be hidden,
you can put the blame on Arne—’twill be believed the
sooner—”</p>
<p class="c015">Just then one of his fingers got into her mouth and at
once she bit it with all her might, so that Bentein shrieked
and let go his hold. Quick as lightning Kristin got one
hand free, seized his face with it and pressed her thumb
with all her might against the ball of one of his eyes; he
roared out and rose to his knees; like a cat she slipped
from his grasp, threw herself upon him so that he fell
upon his back, and, turning, rushed along the road with
the mud splashing over her at every bound.</p>
<p class="c015">She ran and ran without looking back. She heard Bentein
coming after, and she ran till her heart thumped in
her throat, while she moaned softly and strained her eyes
forward—should she never reach Laugarbru? At last she
was out on the road where it passed through the fields;
she saw the group of houses down on the hill-slope, and
at the same moment she bethought her that she durst not
run in there, where her mother was,—in the state she was
now in, plastered with clay and withered leaves from head
to foot, and with her clothing torn to rags.</p>
<p class="c015">She marked that Bentein was gaining upon her; and on
that she bent down and took up two great stones. She
threw them when he came near enough; one struck him
with such force it felled him to the ground. Then she ran
on again and stayed not before she stood upon the bridge.</p>
<p class="c015">All trembling, she stood and clutched the railing of
the bridge; a darkness came before her eyes, and she
feared she would drop down in a swoon—but then she
thought of Bentein; what if he should come and find her.
Shaken with rage and shame she went onwards, though
her legs would scarce bear her, and now she felt her face
smart where fingernails had scarred it, and felt too she had
hurts upon both back and arms. Her tears came hot as
fire.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_89">89</span>She wished Bentein might have been killed by the stone
she had thrown—she wished she had gone back and made
an end of him—she felt for her knife, but found that she
must have lost it.</p>
<p class="c015">Then again came the thought, she must not be seen at
home as she was; and so it came into her mind that she
would go to Romundgaard. She would complain to Sira
Eirik.</p>
<p class="c015">But the priest had not come back yet from Jörundgaard.
In the kitchen-house she found Gunhild, Bentein’s mother;
the woman was alone, and Kristin told her how her son
had dealt with her. But that she had gone out to meet
Arne she did not tell her. When she saw that Gunhild
thought she had been at Laugarbru, she left her to think
so.</p>
<p class="c015">Gunhild said little, but wept a great deal while she
washed the mud off Kristin’s clothes and sewed up the
worst rents. And the girl was so shaken she paid no heed
to the covert glances Gunhild cast on her now and then.</p>
<p class="c015">When Kristin went, Gunhild took her cloak and went
out with her, but took the way to the stables. Kristin
asked her whither she was going.</p>
<p class="c015">“Surely I may have leave to ride down and look after
my son,” answered the woman. “See whether you have
killed him with that stone of yours, or how it fares with
him.”</p>
<p class="c015">There seemed to be naught Kristin could answer to
this, so she said only that Gunhild should see to it Bentein
got out of the parish as soon as might be, and kept out
of her sight, “—or I will speak of this to Lavrans, and you
can guess, I trow, what would happen then.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">And indeed, Bentein went southward not more than a
week later; he carried letters from Sira Eirik to the Bishop
of Hamar begging the Bishop to find work for him or otherwise
to help him.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_90">90</span>
<h3 class="c013">7</h3>
</div>
<p class="c017">One day at Yule-tide Simon Andressön came riding to
Jörundgaard, a quite unlooked for guest. He craved
pardon for coming thus, unbidden and alone, without
his kinsfolk. But Sir Andres was in Sweden on the
King’s business; he himself had been home at Dyfrin
for a time, but only his young sisters and his mother, who
lay ill abed, were there; so time had hung on his hands,
and a great longing had taken him to look in upon them up
here.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid and Lavrans thanked him much for having
made this long journey in the depth of winter. The more
they saw of Simon the more they liked him. He knew
of all that had passed between Andres and Lavrans, and
it was now fixed that his and Kristin’s betrothal ale
should be drunk before the beginning of Lent if Sir Andres
would be home by that time, but, if not, then as soon as
Easter was past.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was quiet and downcast when with her betrothed;
she found not much to talk of with him. One evening
when they had all been sitting drinking, he asked her
to go out with him a little into the cool. Then, as they
stood on the balcony in front of the upper hall, he put
his arm round her waist and kissed her. After that he
did the same often when they were alone. It gave her no
gladness, but she suffered him to do it, since she knew the
betrothal was a thing that must come. She thought of
her wedding now only as something which she must go
through with, not as something she wished for. None
the less she liked Simon well enough—most, though, when
he talked with others and did not touch or talk to her.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">She had been so unhappy through this whole autumn.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_91">91</span>It was of no use, however often she told herself Bentein
had been able to do her no harm; none the less she felt
herself soiled and shamed.</p>
<p class="c015">Nothing could be the same as it had been before, since
a man had dared try to wreak such a will on her. She
lay awake of nights and burned with shame and could not
stop thinking of it. She felt Bentein’s body close against
hers as when they fought, his hot, beery breath—she could
not help thinking of what might have happened—and
she thought, with a shudder through all her body, of
what he had said: how Arne would get the blame if it
could not be hidden. There rushed through her mind
all that would have followed if such a calamity had befallen
and then folk had heard of her meeting with Arne—what
if her father and mother had believed such a
thing of Arne—and Arne himself—She saw him as she
had seen him that last evening, and she felt as though she
sank crushed before him at the very thought that she <i>might</i>
have dragged him down with her into sorrow and disgrace.
And then she had such ugly dreams. She had
heard tell in church and in holy stories of fleshly lusts
and the temptations of the body, but they had meant naught
to her. Now it was become real to her that she herself
and all mankind had a sinful, carnal body which enmeshed
the soul and ate into it with hard bonds.</p>
<p class="c015">Then she would think out for herself how she might
have killed or blinded Bentein. It was the only solace
she could find—to sate herself with dreams of revenge
upon the dark, hateful man who stood always in the way
of her thoughts. But this did not help for long; she lay
by Ulvhild’s side of nights and wept bitter tears at the
thought of all this that had been brought upon her by
brute force. Bentein had not failed altogether—he had
wrought scathe to the maidenhood of her spirit.</p>
<p class="c015">The first work-day after Christmas all the women on
Jörundgaard were busy in the kitchen-house; Ragnfrid
<span class="pageno" id="Page_92">92</span>and Kristin had been there, too, for most of the day. Late
in the evening, while some of the women were clearing up
after the baking, and others making ready for supper, the
dairy-maid came rushing in, shrieking and wringing her
hands:</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus, Jesus—did ever any hear such a dreadful thing—they
are bringing Arne Gyrdson home dead on a sleigh—God
help Gyrd and Inga in this misery—”</p>
<p class="c015">A man who dwelt in a cottage a little way down the
road came in with Halvdan. It was these two who had
met the bier.</p>
<p class="c015">The women crowded round them. Outside the circle
stood Kristin, white and shaking. Halvdan, Lavrans’ own
body-servant, who had known Arne from his boyhood,
wept aloud as he told the story:</p>
<p class="c015">It was Bentein Priestson who had killed Arne. On New
Year’s Eve the men of the Bishop’s household were sitting
and drinking in the men’s hall, and Bentein had come in—he
had been given a clerkship now with the Corpus
Christi prebendary. The men did not want him amongst
them at first, but he had put Arne in mind that they were
both from the same parish, and Arne had let him sit by
him, and they had drunk together. But presently they had
quarrelled and fought, and Arne had fallen on so fiercely
that Bentein had snatched a knife from they table and
stabbed him in the throat and then more than once in the
breast. Arne had died almost at once.</p>
<p class="c015">The Bishop had taken this mischance much to heart; he
himself had cared for the laying-out of the corpse, and
had it brought all the long way home by his own folk. Bentein
he had thrown into irons, cast him out from the church,
and if he were not already hanged, he was going to be.</p>
<p class="c015">Halvdan had to tell all this over again many times as
fresh people streamed in. Lavrans and Simon came over
to the kitchen too, when they marked all the stir and commotion
about the place. Lavrans was much moved; he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_93">93</span>bade them saddle his horse, he would ride over to Brekken
at once. As he was about to go, his eyes fell on
Kristin’s white face.</p>
<p class="c015">“May be <i>you</i> would like to go with me?” he asked.
Kristin faltered a little; she shuddered—but then she nodded,
for she could not utter one word.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is’t not too cold for her?” said Ragnfrid. “Doubtless
they will have the wake to-morrow, and then ’tis like
we shall all go together—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans looked at his wife; he marked Simon’s face
too; and then he went and laid his arm round Kristin’s
shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“She is his foster-sister, you must bear in mind,” said
he. “Maybe she would like to help Inga with the laying-out
the body.”</p>
<p class="c015">And though Kristin’s heart was benumbed with despair
and fear, she felt a glow of thankfulness to her father for
his words.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid said then, that if Kristin was to go, they must
eat their evening porridge before they started. She wished,
too, to send gifts to Inga by them—a new linen sheet,
wax-candles and fresh-baked bread; and she bade them say
she would come up herself and help to prepare for the
burial.</p>
<p class="c015">There was little eating, but much talking in the room
while the food was on the table. One reminded the other
of the trials that God had laid upon Gyrd and Inga. Their
farm had been laid waste by stone-slips and floods: more
than one of their elder children were dead, so that all
Arne’s brothers and sisters were still but little ones. They
had had fortune with them now for some years, since the
Bishop placed Gyrd at Finsbrekken as his bailiff; and the
children who were left to them were fair and full of promise.
But his mother loved Arne more than all the rest—</p>
<p class="c015">They pitied Sira Eirik too. The priest was beloved and
well respected and the folk of the parish were proud of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_94">94</span>him; he was learned and skilled in his office and in all
the years he had had their church he had never let a holy day
or mass or a service pass that he was in duty bound
to hold. In his youth he had been man-at-arms under
Count Alv of Tornberg but he had had the misfortune to
kill a man of very high birth, and so had taken refuge with
the Bishop of Oslo; when the Bishop saw what a turn
Eirik had for book-learning, he had him trained for a
priest. And had it not been that he still had enemies by
reason of that slaying of long ago, it was like Sira Eirik
would not have stayed here in this little charge. True
enough, he was very greedy of pence, both for his own
purse and for the church, but then, was not his church
richly fitted out with plate and vestments and books? and
he himself had these children—and he had had naught but
sorrow and trouble with his family. In these far away
country parishes folk held it was not reason that priests
should live like monks, for they must at the least have
women to help on their farms, and they might well need
a woman to look after things for them, seeing what long
and toilsome journeys they must make round the parishes,
and that too in all kinds of weather; besides folk had not
forgotten that it was not so very long since priests in Norway
had been wedded men. Thus no one had blamed Sira
Eirik over much that he had had three children by the
woman who tended his house, while he was yet young.
But this evening they said, it looked, indeed, as though
’twas God’s will to punish Eirik for his loose living, so
much evil had his children and his children’s children
brought upon him. And some thought there was good
reason, too, that a priest should have neither wife nor
children—for after this it was much to be feared that bitterness
and enmity would arise between the priest and the
folk on Finsbrekken, who until now had been the best of
friends.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon Andressön knew much of Bentein’s doings in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_95">95</span>Oslo; and he told of them. Bentein had been clerk to the
Dean of the Church of the Holy Virgin, and he had the
name of being a quick-witted youth. There were many
women, too, who liked him well—he had roving eyes, and
a glib tongue. Some held him a comely man—these were
for the most part such women as thought they had a bad
bargain in their husbands, and then young maids, the sort
that liked well that men should be somewhat free with
them. Simon laughed—aye, they understood? Well,
Bentein was so sly, he never went too far with that kind
of woman; he was all talk with them, and so he got a
name for clean-living. But the thing was that King Haakon,
as they knew, was a good and pious man himself,
and fain would keep order among his men and hold them
to a seemly walk and conversation—the young ones at
least; the others were apt to be too much for him. And
it came about that whatever pranks the youngsters managed
to slip out and take part in—drinking bouts, gambling
and beer-drinking and such like—the priest of the King’s
household always got to hear of, and the mad-caps had
to confess and pay scot and suffer hard reproof; aye,
two or three of the wildest youths of all were hunted away.
But at last it came out it was this fox, Bentein secretarius—unknown
to anyone he had been made free of all
the beer-houses and worse places still; he confessed the
serving-wenches and gave them absolution—</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sat at her mother’s side; she tried to eat so that
no one should mark how it was with her, though her
hand shook so that she spilled the milk porridge at each
spoonful, and her tongue felt so thick and dry in her
mouth that she could not swallow the morsels of bread.
But when Simon began to tell of Bentein, she had to give
up making believe to eat; she held on to the bench beneath
her—terror and loathing seized her, so that she felt
dizzy and sick. It was he who had wanted to—Bentein
and Arne, Bentein and Arne—Beside herself with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>impatience, she waited for them to be finished. She longed
to see Arne, Arne’s comely face, to throw herself down
beside him and mourn and forget all else.</p>
<p class="c015">As her mother helped her with her outer wrappings,
she kissed her daughter on the cheek. Kristin was so little
used to endearments from her mother now, it comforted
her much—she laid her head upon Ragnfrid’s
shoulder a moment, but she could not weep.</p>
<p class="c015">When they came out of the courtyard, she saw that
others were going with them—Halvdan, Jon from Laugarbru,
and Simon and his man. It gave her a pang, she
knew not why, that the two strangers should be coming
with them.</p>
<p class="c015">It was a bitter cold evening, and the snow crackled
under foot; in the black sky the stars crowded thick, glittering
like rime. When they had ridden a little way, they
heard yells and howls and furious hoof-beats from the
flats to the south—a little further up the road a whole
troop of horsemen came tearing up behind and swept past
them with a ringing of metal, leaving behind a vapour of
reeking, rime-covered horseflesh, which reached them even
where they stood aside in the deep snow. Halvdan hailed
the wild crew—they were youths from the farms in the
south of the parish; they were still keeping Yule-tide and
were out trying their horses. Some, who were too drunk
to understand, thundered on at a gallop, roaring at the
top of their voices and hammering on their shields. But
a few grasped the tidings which Halvdan shouted to them;
they fell out of the troop, grew silent, joined Lavrans’
company and talked in whispers to those in the rear.</p>
<p class="c015">At last they came in sight of Finsbrekken, on the hillside
beyond the Sil river. There were lights about the
houses—in the middle of the courtyard pine-root torches
had been planted in a heap of snow, and their glare lay
red over the white slopes, but the black houses looked as
though smeared with clotted blood. One of Arne’s little
<span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span>sisters stood outside and stamped her feet; she hugged her
hands beneath her cloak. Kristin kissed the tear-stained,
half-frozen child. Her heart was heavy as stone, and it
seemed as though she had lead in her limbs, as she climbed
the stairs to the loft-room where they had laid him.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The sound of singing and the glitter of many lighted
candles met them in the doorway. In the middle of the
room stood the coffin he had been brought home in, covered
with a sheet; boards had been laid on trestles and the coffin
placed upon them. At the head of the bier a young
priest stood with a book in his hands, chanting; round
about knelt the mourners with their faces hidden in their
heavy cloaks.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans lit his candle at one of those already burning,
set it firmly upon one of the boards of the bier and knelt
down. Kristin tried to do the like, but could not get her
candle to stand; so Simon took it and helped her. As
long as the priest went on chanting, all stayed upon their
knees and repeated his words in whispers, their breath
hanging like steam about their mouths, in the bitter cold
air of the room.</p>
<p class="c015">When the priest shut his book and the folk rose—there
were many gathered in the death-chamber already—Lavrans
went forward to Inga. She stared at Kristin, and
seemed scarce to hear what Lavrans said; she stood holding
the gifts he had handed to her as though she knew not
she had aught in her hand.</p>
<p class="c015">“Are <i>you</i> come, too, Kristin,” she said in a strange,
laboured voice. “Maybe you would see my son, so as he
is come back to me?”</p>
<p class="c015">She pushed some of the candles aside, seized Kristin’s
arm with a shaking hand, and with the other swept the
napkin from the face of the dead.</p>
<p class="c015">It was greyish-yellow like clay, and the lips had the hue
of lead; they had parted a little, so that the small, even,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>bone-white teeth showed through as in a mocking smile.
Under the long eyelashes there was a gleam of the glassy
eyes, and there were some livid stains below the temples,
either marks of blows or the death-spots.</p>
<p class="c015">“Maybe you would kiss him?” asked Inga, as before; and
Kristin bent forward at her bidding and pressed her lips
upon the dead man’s cheek. It was clammy as with dew,
and she thought she could feel the least breath of decay;
the body had begun to thaw perhaps with the heat from
all the tapers round.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stayed still, lying with her hands on the bier,
for she could not rise. Inga drew the shroud further
aside, so that the great gash above the collarbone came to
sight. Then she turned towards the people and said with
a shaking voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“They lie, I see, who say a dead man’s wounds will bleed
when he is touched by him who wrought his death. He
is colder now, my boy, and less comely, than when you
met him last down there on the road. You care not much
to kiss him now, I see—but I have heard you scorned not
his lips then.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Inga,” said Lavrans, coming forward, “have you lost
your wits—are you raving—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, aye, you are all so fine, down at Jörundgaard—you
were far too rich a man, you Lavrans Björgulfsön, for my
son to dare think of courting your daughter with honour—and
Kristin, too, she thought herself too good. But she
was not too good to run after him on the highway at night
and play with him in the thickets the night he left—ask
her yourself and we will see if she dare deny it here, with
Arne lying dead—and all through her lightness—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans did not ask, he turned to Gyrd:</p>
<p class="c015">“Curb your wife, man—you see she has clean lost her
wits—”</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin lifted her white face and looked desperately
about her:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>“I went and met Arne the last evening because he begged
me to. But naught of wrong passed between us.” And
then, as she seemed to come to herself and to understand
all, she cried out: “I know not what you mean, Inga—would
you slander Arne, and he lying here—never did
he tempt me nor lure me astray—”</p>
<p class="c015">But Inga laughed aloud:</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, not Arne! but Bentein Priest—<i>he</i> did not let you
play with him so—ask Gunhild, Lavrans, that washed the
dirt off your daughter’s back; and ask each man who was
in the Bishop’s henchmen’s hall on New Year’s Eve, when
Bentein flouted Arne for that he had let her go, and leave
him standing like a fool. She let Bentein walk homeward
with her under her cloak and would have played the same
game with him—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans took her by the shoulder and laid his hand over
her mouth:</p>
<p class="c015">“Take her away, Gyrd. Shameful it is that you should
speak such words by this good youth’s body—but if all
your children lay here dead, I would not stand and hear
you lie about mine—you, Gyrd, must answer for what
this madwoman says—”</p>
<p class="c015">Gyrd took hold of his wife and tried to lead her away,
but he said to Lavrans:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis true, though, ’twas of Kristin they talked, Arne
and Bentein, when my son lost his life. Like enough you
have not heard it, but there hath been talk in the parish
here too this autumn—”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon struck a blow with his sword upon the clothes-chest
beside him:</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, good folk, now must you find somewhat else to
talk of in this death-chamber than my betrothed—Priest,
can you not rule these folk and keep seemly order
here—?”</p>
<p class="c015">The priest—Kristin saw now he was the youngest
son from Ulvsvolden, who had been at home for Yule—opened
<span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span>his book and stood up beside the bier. But Lavrans
shouted that those who had talked about his daughter, let
them be who they might, should be made to swallow their
words, and Inga shrieked:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, take my life then, Lavrans, since she has taken
all my comfort and joy—and make her wedding with
this knight’s son; but yet do all folk know that she
was wed with Bentein upon the highway—Here—,”
and she cast the sheet Lavrans had given her right
across the bier to Kristin, “I need not Ragnfrid’s linen to
lay my Arne in the grave—make head-cloths of it,
you, or keep it to swaddle your roadside brat—and
go down and help Gunhild to moan for the man that’s
hanged—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans, Gyrd and the priest took hold of Inga. Simon
tried to lift Kristin, who was lying over the bier. But
she thrust his arm fiercely aside, drew herself up straight
upon her knees and cried aloud:</p>
<p class="c015">“So God my Saviour help me, it is false!” and, stretching
out one hand, she held it over the nearest candle on the bier.</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed as if the flame bent and waved aside—Kristin
felt all eyes fixed upon her—what seemed to her a long
time went by. And then all at once she grew aware of
a burning pain in her palm, and with a piercing cry she
fell back upon the floor.</p>
<p class="c015">She thought, herself, she swooned—but she was aware
that Simon and the priest raised her. Inga shrieked
out something; she saw her father’s horror-stricken face,
and heard the priest shout that no one must take account of
this ordeal—not thus might one call God to witness,—and
then Simon bore her from the room and down
the stairs. Simon’s man ran to the stable, and soon after
Kristin was sitting, still half senseless, in front of Simon on
his saddle, wrapped in his coat, and he was riding toward
Jörundgaard as fast as his horse could gallop.</p>
<p class="c015">They were nigh to Jörundgaard when Lavrans came up
<span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>with them. The rest of their company came thundering
along the road far behind.</p>
<p class="c015">“Say naught to your mother,” said Simon, as he set her
down at the door of the house. “We have heard all too
much wild talk to-night; ’tis no wonder you lost your wits
yourself at the last.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid was lying awake when they came in, and she
asked how things had been in the wake chamber. Simon
took it upon himself to answer for all. Aye, there had
been many candles and many folk; aye, there had been
a priest—Tormod from Ulvsvolden—Sira Eirik he heard
had ridden off to Hamar this very evening, so there would
be no trouble about the burial.</p>
<p class="c015">“We must have a mass said over the lad,” said Ragnfrid;
“God strengthen Inga; the good worthy woman is sorely
tried.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sang the same tune as Simon and in a little
Simon said that now they must all go to rest; “for Kristin
is both weary and sorrowful.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">After a time, when Ragnfrid slept, Lavrans threw on a
few clothes, and went and seated himself on the edge of his
daughters’ bed. He found Kristin’s hand in the dark and
said very gently:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now must you tell me, child, what is true and what is
false in all this talk Inga is spreading?”</p>
<p class="c015">Sobbing, Kristin told him all that had befallen the evening
Arne set out for Hamar. Lavrans said but little.
Kristin crept toward him in her bed, threw her arms around
his neck and wailed softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“It <i>is</i> my fault that Arne is dead—’tis but too true, what
Inga said—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas Arne himself that begged you to go and meet
him,” said Lavrans, pulling the coverlid up over his daughter’s
bare shoulders. “I trow it was heedless in me to let
<span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span>you two go about together, but I thought the lad would have
known better—I will not blame you two—I know these
things are heavy for you to bear. Yet did I never think
that daughter of mine would fall into ill-fame in this parish
of ours—and ’twill go hard with your mother when she
hears these tidings—But that you went to Gunhild with
this and not to me, ’twas so witless a thing—I understand
not how you could behave so foolishly—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot bear to stay here in the Dale any more,” sobbed
Kristin, “—not a soul would I dare look in the face—and
all I have brought upon them—the folks at Romundgaard
and at Finsbrekken—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, they will have to see to it, both Gyrd and Sira
Eirik,” said Lavrans, “that these lies about you are buried
with Arne. For the rest, ’tis Simon Andressön can best defend
you in this business,” said he, and patted her in the
dark. “Think you not he took the matter well and wisely—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Father”—and Kristin clung close to him and begged
piteously and fervently, “send me to the convent, father.
Aye, listen to me—I have thought of this for long; may be
Ulvhild will grow well if I go in her stead. You know the
shoes with beads upon them that I sewed for her in the
autumn—I pricked my fingers sorely, and my hands bled
from the sharp gold-thread—yet I sat and sewed on them,
for I thought it was wicked of me not to love my sister so
that I would be a nun to help her—Arne once asked if I
would not. Had I but said ‘Aye’ then, all this would not
have befallen—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans shook his head:</p>
<p class="c015">“Lie down now,” he bade. “You know not yourself
what you say, poor child. Now you must try if you can
sleep—”</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin lay and felt the smart in her burnt hand, and
despair and bitterness over her fate raged in her heart. No
worse could have befallen her had she been the most sinful
<span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span>of women; everyone would believe—no, she could not,
could not bear to stay on here in the Dale. Horror after
horror rose before her—when her mother came to know of
this—and now there was blood between them and their parish
priest, ill-will betwixt all who had been friends around
her the whole of her life. But the worst, the most crushing
fear of all fell upon her when she thought of Simon and of
how he had taken her and carried her away and stood forth
for her at home, and borne himself as though she were his
own possession—her father and mother had fallen aside
before him as though she belonged already more to him
than to them—</p>
<p class="c015">Then she thought of Arne’s face in the coffin, cold and
cruel. She remembered the last time she was at church,
she had seen, as she left, an open grave that stood waiting
for a dead man. The upthrown clods of earth lay upon the
snow hard and cold and grey like iron—to this had she
brought Arne—</p>
<p class="c015">All at once the thought came to her of a summer evening
many years before. She was standing on the balcony of
the loft-room at Finsbrekken, the same room where she had
been struck down that night. Arne was playing ball with
some boys in the courtyard below, and the ball was hit up
to her in the balcony. She had held it behind her back,
and would not give it up when Arne came after it; then he
had tried to wrest it from her by strength—and they had
fought for it, in the balcony, in the room amid the chests,
with the leather sacks, which hung there full of clothes,
bumping their heads as they knocked against them in their
frolic; they had laughed and struggled over that ball—</p>
<p class="c015">And then, at last, the truth seemed to come home to her:
he was dead and gone, and she should never again see his
comely, fearless face nor feel the touch of his warm, living
hands. And she had been so childish and so heartless as
never to give a thought to what it must be for him to lose
her—She wept bitter tears, and felt she had earned all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span>her unhappiness. But then the thought came back of all
that still awaited her, and she wept anew, for, after all, it
seemed to her too hard a punishment—</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">It was Simon who told Ragnfrid of what happened in
the corpse chamber at Brekken the night before. He did
not make more of it than he needs must. But Kristin was
so amazed with sorrow and night waking that she felt a
senseless anger against him because he talked as if it were
not so dreadful a thing after all. Besides it vexed her
sorely that her father and mother let Simon behave as
though he were master of the house.</p>
<p class="c015">“And you Simon—surely you believe not aught of this?”
asked Ragnfrid, fearfully.</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” replied Simon. “Nor do I deem there is anyone
who believes it—they know you and her and this Bentein;
but so little befalls for folk to talk of in these outparishes—’tis
but reason they should fall to on such a fat titbit. ’Tis
for us to teach them Kristin’s good name is too fine fare for
such clowns as they. But pity it was she let herself be so
frighted by his grossness that she went not forthwith to
you or to Sira Eirik with the tale—methinks this bordel-priest
would but too gladly have avowed he meant naught
worse than harmless jesting, had you, Lavrans, got a word
with him.”</p>
<p class="c015">Both Kristin’s parents said that Simon was right in this.
But she cried out, stamping her foot:</p>
<p class="c015">“But he threw me down on the ground, I say—I scarce
know myself what he did or did not do—I was beside myself;
I can remember naught—for all I know it may be
as Inga says—I have not been well nor happy a single day
since—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid shrieked and clasped her hands together; Lavrans
started up—even Simon’s face fell; he looked at her
sharply, then went up to her and took her by the chin.</p>
<p class="c015">Then he laughed:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span>“God bless you, Kristin—you had remembered but too
well if he had done you any harm. No marvel if she has
been sad and ill since that unhappy evening she had such an
ugly fright—she who had never known aught but kindness
and goodwill before,” said he to the others. “Any but the
evil minded, who would fain think ill rather than good, can
see by her eyes that she is a maid, and no woman.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked up into her betrothed’s small, steady eyes.
She half lifted her hands—as if to throw them round his
neck—when he went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“You must not think, Kristin, that you will not forget
this. ’Tis not in my mind that we should settle down at
Formo as soon as we are wed, so that you would never
leave the Dale. No one has the same hue of hair or mind
in both rain and sunshine, said old King Sverre, when they
blamed his Birch-legs for being overbearing in good fortune—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans and Ragnfrid smiled—it was pleasant enough to
hear the young man discourse with the air of a wise old
bishop. Simon went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould ill beseem me to seek to teach you, who are to
be my father-in-law; but so much, maybe, I may make bold
to say, that we, my brothers and sisters and I, were brought
up more strictly; we were not let run about so freely with
the house-folk as I have seen that Kristin is used to. My
mother often said that if one played with the cottar carls’
brats, ’twas like one would get a louse or two in one’s hair
in the end—and there’s somewhat in that saying.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans and Ragnfrid held their peace, but Kristin turned
away, and the wish she had felt but a moment before
to clasp Simon round the neck, had quite left her.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Towards noon, Lavrans and Simon took their ski and
went out to see to some snares up on the mountain ridges.
The weather was fine outside—sunshine, and the cold not
so great. Both men were glad to slip away from all the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span>sadness and weeping at home, and so they went far—right
up among the bare hilltops.</p>
<p class="c015">They lay in the sun under a crag and drank and ate; Lavrans
spoke a little of Arne—he had loved the boy well,
Simon chimed in, praised the dead lad, and said he thought
it not strange that Kristin grieved for her foster brother.
Then Lavrans said: maybe they should not press her much,
but should give her a little time to get back her peace of
mind before they drank the betrothal ale. She had said
somewhat of wishing to go into a convent for a time.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon sat bolt upright, and gave a long whistle.</p>
<p class="c015">“You like not the thought?” asked Lavrans.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, but I do, I do,” said the other hastily. “Methinks
it is the best way, dear father-in-law. Send her to the Sisters
in Oslo for a year—there will she learn how folk talk one
of the other out in the world. I know a little of some of
the maidens who are there,” he said laughing. “<i>They</i>
would not throw themselves down and die of grief if two
mad younkers tore each other to pieces for their sakes.
Not that I would have such an one for wife—but methinks
Kristin will be none the worse for meeting new folks.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans put the rest of the food into the wallet and said,
without looking at the youth:</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks you love Kristin—?”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon laughed a little and did not look at Lavrans:</p>
<p class="c015">“Be sure, I know her worth—and yours too,” he said
quickly and shamefacedly, as he got up and took his ski.
“None that I have ever met would I sooner wed with—”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">A little before Easter, when there was still snow enough
for sleighing down the Dale and the ice still bore on Mjösen,
Kristin journeyed southward for the second time. Simon
came up to bear her company—so now she journeyed
driving in a sleigh, well wrapped in furs and with father
and betrothed beside her; and after them followed her
father’s men and sledges with her clothes, and gifts of food
and furs for the Abbess and the Sisters of Nonneseter.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>
<h2 class="c009">BOOK TWO</h2>
</div>
<div class="c012"><span class="c004">THE GARLAND</span></div>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c006"/>
</div>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>
<h3 class="c013">1</h3>
</div>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">AASMUND BJÖRGULFSÖN’S church-boat stood in
round the point of Hovedö early one Sunday at the
end of April, while the bells were ringing in the
cloister-church and were answered from across the bay by
the chimes of bells from the town, now louder and now
fainter as the breeze rose or fell.</p>
<p class="c015">Light, fluted clouds were floating over the high, pale-blue
heavens, and the sun was glittering on the dancing
ripples of the water. It was quite spring-like along the
shores; the fields lay almost bare of snow, and over the
leaf-tree thickets the light had a yellow shimmer and the
shadows were blue. But in the pine-forests up on the
high ridges, which framed in the settled lands of Akersbygd,
there were glimpses of snow, and on the far blue fells to
the westward, beyond the fjord, there still showed many
flashes of white.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was standing in the bow of the boat with her
father, and Gyrid, Aasmund’s wife. She gazed at the town,
with all the light-hued churches and stone buildings that
rose above the swarm of grey-brown wooden houses and
bare tree-tops. The wind ruffled the skirts of her cloak
and snatched at her hair beneath her hood.</p>
<p class="c015">They had left the cattle out at Skog the day before, and
a great longing had come on her to be at Jörundgaard. It
would be a long time still before they could let the cattle
out there—she longed with tender pity for the lean, winter-worn
cows in the dark byres; they would have to wait and
suffer a long while yet. Her mother, Ulvhild, who had slept
in her arms each night all these years, little Ramborg—she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>yearned so much for them; she longed for all the folk
at home, and the horses and the dogs, for Kortelin, whom
Ulvhild was to have while she was gone, and for her father’s
hawks as they sat there on their perches with their hoods
over their heads. She saw the horse-hide gloves that hung
beside them to wear when you took them on to your wrist,
and the ivory staves to scratch them with.</p>
<p class="c015">It was as if all the woe of the last winter had gone far
away from her and she only saw her home as it used to be.
They had told her, too, that none thought ill of her in the
parish—Sira Eirik did not believe that story; he was angry
and grieved at what Bentein had done. Bentein had fled
from Hamar; ’twas said he had gone to Sweden. So things
were not so bad between them and their neighbour as she
had feared.</p>
<p class="c015">On the journey down to Oslo they had stayed as guests
at Simon’s home, and she had come to know his mother and
sisters—Sir Andres was in Sweden still. She had not felt
at ease there, and her dislike of the Dyfrin folk was all the
stronger that she could think of no good ground for it.
All the way thither, she had said to herself that they had no
cause to be proud or to think themselves better than her kin—no
man knew aught of Reidar Darre, the Birch-leg, before
King Sverre got him the widow of the Dyfrin Baron to
wife. But lo! they were not proud at all; and when Simon
himself spoke one night of his forefather: “I have found
out now for sure—he was a comb-maker—so ’tis as though
you were to come into a kingly stock—almost, Kristin,”
said he. “Take heed to your tongue, boy,” said his mother
but they all laughed together. It vexed her strangely
when she thought of her father; he laughed much, if Simon
gave him the least cause—a thought came to her dimly that
maybe her father would gladly have had more laughter in
his life—But ’twas not to her mind that he should like
Simon so much.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>They had all been at Skog over Easter. She had found
that her uncle was a hard master to his farmers and serving-folk—she
had met one and another who asked after
her mother and spoke lovingly of Lavrans: they had better
times when he lived here. Aasmund’s mother, Lavrans’
step-mother, lived on the manor in a house by herself; she
was not so very old, but sickly and failing. Lavrans had
but seldom spoken of her at home. Once when Kristin
asked him if he had had a hard step-mother, her father
answered: “She never did much to me of either good
or ill.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin felt for her father’s hand, and he pressed hers:</p>
<p class="c015">“You will be happy soon enough, my daughter, with the
good Sisters—you will have other things to think of besides
longing to be home with us—”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They sailed so near by the town that the smell of tar and
salt fish was borne out to them from the wharves. Gyrid
named all the churches, the traders’ quarters and the open
places which ran up from the water’s edge—Kristin remembered
nothing from the time she was here before but
the great heavy towers of St. Halvard’s church. They
sailed westward past the whole town and laid to at the
convent pier.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin walked between her father and her uncle through
a cluster of warehouses, and came out upon a road which
led up through the fields. Simon came after, leading
Gyrid by the hand. The serving-folk stayed behind to
help some men from the convent load the baggage upon
a cart.</p>
<p class="c015">Nonneseter and the whole Leiran quarter lay within the
boundaries of the town grazing-grounds, but there were
but a few clusters of houses here and there along the roadside.
The larks were trilling over their heads in the pale-blue
sky, and the small yellow flowers of the coltsfoot were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>thickly sprinkled over the wan clay slopes, but along by the
fences the roots of the grass were green.</p>
<p class="c015">When they were through the gate and were come into
the cloister, all the nuns came marching two by two towards
them from the church, while song and music streamed out
after them through the open door.</p>
<p class="c015">Ill at ease, Kristin watched the many black-robed women
with white linen wimples about their faces. She curtsied
low, and the men bowed with their hats held close to their
breasts. After the nuns came a flock of young maidens—some
of them but children—in gowns of undyed wadmal,
their waists bound with belts of twined black and
white, and their hair braided tightly back from their
faces with cords of the same black and white. Without
thinking, Kristin put on a bold and forward look
as the young maids passed, for she felt bashful, and was
afraid they must think she looked countrified and foolish.</p>
<p class="c015">The convent was so glorious that she was quite overcome.
All the buildings round the inner court were of
grey stone; on the north side the main-wall of the church
stood up high above the other houses; it had two tiers of
roofs and towers at the west end. The court itself was laid
with stone flags, and round the whole there ran a covered
way whose roof was borne on pillars fairly wrought. In
the midst of the court stood a stone statue of the Mater
Misericordiæ, spreading her cloak over some kneeling
figures.</p>
<p class="c015">Then a lay-sister came and prayed them to go with her
to the Abbess’ parlour. The Lady Groa Guttormsdatter
was a tall and stoutly-made old woman—she would have
been comely had she not had so many hairs about her
mouth. Her voice was deep like a man’s. But her bearing
was gentle and kindly—she called to mind that she had
known Lavrans’ father and mother, and asked after his wife
<span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>and his other children. Last she spoke to Kristin in
friendly wise:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have heard good report of you, and you look to be
wise and well nurtured—sure I am you will give us no
cause for miscontent. I have heard that you are plighted
to this good and well-born man, Simon Andressön, whom
I see here—it seems to us that ’twas wise counsel of your
father and your husband to be, to grant you leave to live
here awhile in the Virgin Mary’s house, that you may learn
to obey and serve before you are called to rule and to command.
Now would I have you lay to heart this counsel:
that you learn to find joy in prayer and the worship of
God, that you may use yourself in all your doings to remember
your Creator, God’s gentle Mother, and all the
Saints who have given us the best patterns of strength, uprightness,
faithfulness and all the virtues you must show
forth in guiding your people and your goods and nurturing
your children. And you will learn in this house, too,
to take good heed of time, for here every hour has its use
and its task also. Many young maids and women love all
too well to lie abed late of a morning, and sit long at table
of an evening in idle talk—yet look not you as you were
one of these. Yet may you learn much in the year you
are here that may profit you both here on earth and in our
heavenly home.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin curtsied and kissed her hand. After that Lady
Groa bade Kristin go with a monstrously fat old nun, whom
she called Sister Potentia, over to the nuns’ refectory. The
men and Gyrid she asked to dine with her in another house.</p>
<p class="c015">The refectory was a great and fair room with a stone
floor and pointed windows with glass panes. There was a
doorway into another room, where, Kristin could see, there
must be glass windows too, for the sun shone in.</p>
<p class="c015">The Sisters were already seated at the table waiting for
their food—the elder nuns upon a cushioned stone-bench
<span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>along the wall under the windows; the younger Sisters and
the bareheaded maidens in light-hued wadmal dresses sat
upon a wooden bench on the outer side of the board. In
the next room a board was laid too; this was for the commoners
and the lay-servants; there were a few old men
amongst them. These folk did not wear the convent habit,
but were none the less clad soberly in dark raiment.</p>
<p class="c015">Sister Potentia showed Kristin to a seat on the outer
bench, but went and placed herself near to the Abbess’
high-seat at the end of the board—the high-seat was empty
to-day.</p>
<p class="c015">All rose, both in this room and in the side room, while
the Sisters said grace. After that a fair, young nun went
and stood at a lectern placed in the doorway between the
two chambers. And while the lay-sisters in the greater
room, and two of the youngest nuns in the side room, bore
in food and drink, the nun read in a high and sweet voice,
and without stopping or tripping at a single word, the story
of St. Theodora and St. Didymus.</p>
<p class="c015">At first Kristin was thinking most of minding her table-manners,
for she saw all the Sisters and the young maids
bore them as seemly and ate as nicely as though they had
been sitting at the finest feast. There was abundance of
the best food and drink, but all helped themselves modestly,
and dipped but the very tips of their fingers into the dishes;
no one spilled the broth either upon the cloths or upon
their garments, and all cut up the meat so small that they
did not soil their mouths, and ate with so much care that
not a sound was to be heard.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin grew hot with fear that she might not seem as
well-behaved as the others; she was feeling ill at ease, too,
in her bright dress in the midst of all these women in
black and white—she fancied that they were all looking at
her. So when she had to eat a fat piece of breast of
mutton, and was holding it by the bone with two fingers,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span>while cutting morsels off with her right hand, and taking
care to handle the knife lightly and neatly—suddenly the
whole slipped from her fingers; her slice of bread and the
meat flew on to the cloth, and the knife fell clattering on
the stone flags.</p>
<p class="c015">The noise sounded fearfully in the quiet room. Kristin
flushed red as fire and would have bent to pick up the
knife, but a lay-sister came noiselessly in her sandals and
gathered up the things.</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin could eat no more. She found, too, that she
had cut one of her fingers, and she was afraid of bleeding
upon the cloth; so she sat with her hand wrapped in a corner
of her skirt, and thought of how she was staining the
goodly light-blue dress she had gotten for the journey to
Oslo—and she did not dare to raise her eyes from her lap.</p>
<p class="c015">Howbeit, in a little she began to listen more to what the
nun was reading. When the ruler found he could not
shake the steadfastness of the maid, Theodora—she would
neither make offerings to the false gods nor let herself be
given in marriage—he bade them lead her to a brothel.
Yet while on the way thither he exhorted her to think of her
free born kindred and her honoured father and mother,
upon whom everlasting shame must now be brought, and
gave his word she should be let live in peace and stay a
maid, if she would but join the service of a heathen goddess,
whom they called Diana.</p>
<p class="c015">Theodora answered fearlessly: “Chastity is like a lamp,
but love of God is the flame; were I to serve the devilwoman
whom you call Diana, my chastity were no more
worth than a rusty lamp without flame or oil. Thou
callest me freeborn, but we are all born bondsmen, since
our first parents sold us to the devil; Christ has bought me
free, and I am bound to serve him, so that I cannot wed
me with his foes. He will guard his dove; but should he
even suffer you to break my body, that is the temple of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span>his Holy Spirit, it shall not be counted to me for shame
if so be that I consent not to betray what is His into the
hands of his enemies.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s heart began to throb, for this in some way reminded
her of her meeting with Bentein—she was smitten
by the thought that this perhaps was her sin—she had not
for a moment thought of God nor prayed for His help.
And now Sister Cecilia read further of St. Didymus. He
was a Christian knight, but heretofore he had kept his
faith hidden from all save a few friends. He went now
to the house where the maid was; he gave money to the
woman who owned the house, and thus was the first to
be let in to Theodora. She fled into a corner like a
frightened hare, but Didymus hailed her as his sister and
as his Lord’s bride and said he was come to save her. Then
he spake with her a while, saying: was it not meet that a
brother should wage his life for his sister’s honour? And
at last she did as he bade her, changed clothes with him,
and let herself be clad in Didymus’ coat of mail; he pulled
the hat down over her eyes and drew the cape up about her
chin, and bade her go out with her face hidden, like a youth
who is abashed at having been in such a place.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought of Arne, and was scarce able to hold
back her tears. She gazed straight before her with wet eyes
while the nun was reading to the end—how Didymus was
led to the place of execution, and how Theodora came
hastening down from the mountains, cast herself at the
headsman’s feet and begged that she might die in his stead.
And now the holy man and maid strove together who
should first win the crown; and both were beheaded on the
one day. This was the eight and twentieth day of April
in the year 304 after the birth of Christ, in Antioch, as
was written by St. Ambrosius.</p>
<p class="c015">When they rose from the table, Sister Potentia came and
patted Kristin kindly on the cheek: “Aye, you are longing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span>for your mother, I can well believe.” And on that
Kristin’s tears began to fall. But the nun made as though
she did not see them, and led Kristin to the hostel where
she was to dwell.</p>
<p class="c015">It was in one of the stone houses by the cloisters; a
goodly room with glass windows and a big fireplace in the
short wall at the far end. Along one main-wall stood
six bedsteads, and along the other all the maidens’
chests.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin wished they would let her sleep with one of the
little girls, but Sister Potentia called a fat, fair-haired,
grown maiden: “Here is Ingebjörg Filippusdatter, who is
to be your bed-fellow—you must see now and learn to
know each other.” And with that she went out.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg took Kristin at once by the hand and began
to talk. She was not very tall, and was much too fat,
above all in her face—her cheeks were so plump that her
eyes looked quite small. But her skin was clear, red and
white, and her hair was yellow as gold, and so curly that
her thick plaits twisted and twined together like strands of
rope, and small locks kept ever slipping from under her
snood.</p>
<p class="c015">She began straightway to question Kristin about many
things, but never waited for an answer; instead she talked
about herself, reckoned out the whole of her kindred in
all its branches—they were naught but fine and exceeding
rich folk. She was betrothed, too, to a rich and mighty
man, Einar Einarssön of Aganæs—but he was far too old,
and twice widowed; this was her greatest sorrow, she said.
Yet could Kristin not mark that she took it much to heart.
Then she talked a little of Simon Darre—’twas a marvel
how closely she had looked him over in the short moment
when they were passing in the cloisters. After that she
had a mind to look into Kristin’s chest—but first she opened
her own and brought forth all her clothes. While they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>were ransacking their chests, Sister Cecilia came in—she
rebuked them and said that this was no seemly Sunday
pastime. This made Kristin unhappy again—she had
never been taken to task by any but her mother, and that
was not the same as being chid by a stranger.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg was not abashed.—After they were come to
bed in the evening, she lay chattering until Kristin fell
asleep. Two elder lay-sisters slept in a corner of the
room; they were to see that the maidens did not take their
shifts off at night—for it was against the rules for the
girls to undress entirely—and to see that they were up in
time for matins in the church. But else they did not
trouble themselves to keep order in the hostel, and made as
though they marked it not when the maids were lying
talking, or eating the dainties which they had hidden in
their chests.</p>
<p class="c015">When Kristin was awakened next morning, Ingebjörg was
in the midst of a long tale already, so that Kristin almost
wondered whether the other had been talking the whole
night through.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">2</h3>
<p class="c017">The foreign merchants who lay in Oslo during the summer
and trafficked there, came to the town in the spring
about Holy Rood Day, which is ten days before the Halvards-wake
Fair. To this folks streamed in from all the
parishes between Mjösen and the Swedish marches, so that
the town swarmed with people in the first weeks of May.
This was the best time to buy from the strangers, before
they had sold too many of their wares.</p>
<p class="c015">Sister Potentia had the care of the marketing for Nonneseter,
and she had promised Ingebjörg and Kristin that
they should go with her down to the town the day before
<span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span>the Halvards-wake. But about midday some of Sister
Potentia’s kin came to the convent to see her; and so she
could not go that day. Then Ingebjörg begged and prayed
till at last she let them go alone—though it was against
the rules. An old peasant who was a commoner of the
convent was sent with them as escort—Haakon was his
name.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had been three weeks now at Nonneseter, and
in all that time she had not set foot outside the convent
grounds and gardens. She wondered to see how spring-like
it was outside. The little woods out in the fields were
pale-green; the wood anemones grew thick as a carpet
round the light-coloured tree stems; white fair-weather
clouds came sailing up over the islands in the fjord, and
the water lay fresh and blue, slightly ruffled here and there
by the light flaws of wind.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg skipped about, plucked bunches of leaves from
the trees and smelt them, and peeped round after the folk
they met; till Haakon chid her—were these seemly goings-on
for a well-born maid, and in the convent habit too?
The maidens were made to walk just behind him, hand
in hand, quietly and seemly; but Ingebjörg used her eyes
and her tongue all the same—Haakon was somewhat
deaf. Kristin, too, was wearing the novices’ garb now—an
undyed, light-grey wadmal dress, woollen belt and head-band,
and a plain, dark-blue cloak over all, with a hood
turned up so that the plaited hair was quite hid. Haakon
strode in front with a stout brass-knobbed staff in his
hand. He was dressed in a long black gown, had a leaden
Agnus Dei hanging on his breast and an image of St. Christopher
in his hat—his white hair and beard were so well
brushed that they shone like silver in the sunshine.</p>
<p class="c015">The upper part of the town between the Nunsbeck and
the bishop’s palace was a quiet neighbourhood; there were
here neither shops nor taverns; most of the dwelling-places
belonged to great folk from the parishes around, and the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>houses turned dark, windowless, timber gables to the street.
But on this day whole crowds of people were roaming
about the roads even up here, and the serving-folk stood
loitering about the courtyard gates gossiping with the
passers-by.</p>
<p class="c015">When they were come out near the bishop’s palace, there
was a great crush upon the place in front of Halvard’s
Church and the Olav-cloister—booths had been set up on
the grassy slopes, and there were showmen making trained
dogs jump through barrel-hoops. But Haakon would not
have the maids stand and look at these things, and he would
not let Kristin go into the church—he said ’twould be better
worth her seeing on the great Feast-day itself.</p>
<p class="c015">As they came down over the open space by St. Clement’s
Church Haakon took them by the hands, for here was the
greatest press of folk coming from the wharves or out
from the alleys between the traders Yards. The maidens
were bound for the Mickle Yard, where the shoemakers
plied their trade. For Ingebjörg had found the clothes
Kristin had brought from home very good and sightly,
but she said the shoes she had with her from the Dale were
not fit to wear for best. And when Kristin had seen the
shoes from the outland Ingebjörg had in her chest—more
pairs than one—she felt she could not rest until she too
had bought some like them.</p>
<p class="c015">The Mickle Yard was one of the largest in Oslo; it
stretched from the wharves up to the Souters’ Alley, with
more than forty houses round two great courts. And now
they had set up booths with wadmal roofs in the courts as
well. Above the roofs of these tents there rose a statue
of St. Crispinus. Within the courts was a great throng of
folk buying and selling, women running between the kitchens
with pots and pails, children getting in the way of
folks’ feet, horses being led in and out of the stables,
and serving-men carrying packages to and from the warehouses.
From the balconies of the lofts above, where the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span>finest wares were sold, shoemakers and their apprentices
shouted to the two maids and dangled small gaily-coloured
or gold-embroidered shoes before them.</p>
<p class="c015">But Ingebjörg made her way toward the loft where
Didrek the shoemaker sat; he was a German, but had a
Norse wife and owned a house in the Mickle Yard.</p>
<p class="c015">The old man was standing bargaining with an esquire
wearing a traveller’s cloak, and a sword at his belt; but
Ingebjörg went forward unabashed, bowed and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Good sir, will you not suffer us of your courtesy to
have speech with Didrek first; we must be home in our
convent by vespers; you, perchance, have no such great
haste?”</p>
<p class="c015">The esquire bowed and stepped aside. Didrek nudged
Ingebjörg with his elbow and asked laughing whether they
danced so much in the convent that she had worn out already
all the shoon she had of him the year before. Ingebjörg
nudged him again and said they were still unworn,
thank heaven, but here was this other maid—and she pulled
Kristin forward. Then Didrek and his lad bore forth a
box into the balcony; and out of it he brought forth shoes,
each pair finer than the last. They had Kristin sit down
upon a chest that he might try them on her—there were
white shoes and brown and red and green and blue, shoes
with painted wooden heels and shoes without heels, shoes
with buckles and shoes with silken laces in them, shoes in
leather of two or three hues. Kristin felt she would
fain have had them all. But they cost so dear she was
quite dismayed—not one pair cost less than a cow at home.
Her father had given her a purse with a mark of silver in
counted money when he left—that was for pocket money,
and Kristin had deemed it great riches. But she soon saw
that Ingebjörg thought it no great store to go a marketing
with.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg, too, must try on some shoes for the jest of it;
that cost no money, said Didrek laughing. She did buy
<span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>one pair of leaf-green shoes with red heels—she said she
must have them on trust, but then Didrek knew her and
her folks.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought, indeed, that Didrek liked this none too
well, and that he was vexed too, that the tall esquire in
the travelling coat had left the loft—much time had been
taken up with the trying-on. So she chose for herself a
pair of heel-less shoes of thin purple-blue leather, broidered
with silver and with rose-red stones. But she liked
not the green silk laces in them. Didrek said he could
change these, and took the maids with him into a room
at the back of the loft. Here he had coffers full of silk
ribbons and small silver buckles—’twas against the law,
strictly, for shoemakers to trade in these things—and the
ribbons, too, were many of them too broad and the buckles
too big for foot-gear.</p>
<p class="c015">They felt they had to buy one or two of the smaller
things, and when they had drunk a cup of sweet wine with
Didrek and he had packed the things they had bought into
a wadmal cloth, the hour was grown somewhat late, and
Kristin’s purse much lighter.</p>
<p class="c015">When they had come to the Östre Stræte again the sunlight
was turned golden and, by reason of the traffic in
the town, the dust hung over the street in a bright haze.
The evening was warm and fair, and folk were coming
down from Eikaberg with great armfuls of green branches
wherewith to deck their houses for the holy day. And
now the whim took Ingebjörg that they should go out to
the Gjeita bridge—at fair-times there was wont to be so
much merry-making in the fields on the further side of the
river, both jugglers and fiddlers—nay, Ingebjörg had heard
there was come a whole shipful of outlandish beasts that
were being shown in booths down by the waterside.</p>
<p class="c015">Haakon had had a pot or two of German beer at the
Mickle Yard, and was now easy and mild of mood; so
<span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span>when the maidens took him by the arm and begged him
sweetly, he gave way at last, and the three went out towards
Eikaberg.</p>
<p class="c015">Beyond the stream there were but a few small dwelling-places
scattered about the green slopes between the river
and the steep hillside. They went past the Minorite monastery,
and Kristin’s heart sank with shame as she bethought
her how she had meant to give most of her silver
for the good of Arne’s soul. But she had had no mind
to speak of it to the priest at Nonneseter; she feared to
be asked questions—she had thought that she could maybe
come out to the barefoot friars and find if by chance
Brother Edwin were in the cloister now. She was fain
to meet him again—but she knew not, either, what would
be the most seemly way to get speech with one of the
monks and tell him her desire. And now she had so
little money she knew not whether she could buy a mass—maybe
she must be content to offer a thick wax-candle.</p>
<p class="c015">Of a sudden they heard a fearful yell from countless
throats down by the shore—a storm seemed to sweep over
the press of human-beings down there—and now the whole
mass rushed towards them shrieking and shouting. All
seemed wild with terror, and some of the runners-by cried
out to Haakon and the maids that the pards were loose—</p>
<p class="c015">They set out running back to the bridge, and heard folk
shout to one another that a booth had fallen down and two
pards had broken loose—some spoke of a serpent, too—</p>
<p class="c015">The nearer they came to the bridge, the worse became
the crush. Just in front of them a woman dropped a little
child out of her arms—Haakon stood astride the little one
to shield it—soon after they caught sight of him far away
with the child in his arms, and then they lost him.</p>
<p class="c015">At the narrow bridge the press of people was so great
that the maids were pushed right out into a field. They
saw folks run down to the river bank; young men jumped
<span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>in and swam, but elder folk sprang into the boats that
lay there, and these were overladen in a trice.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin tried to make Ingebjörg hear—she cried out to
her that they should run up to the Minorite cloister—they
could see the Grey Friars come running out from it, striving
to gather in the terrified people. Kristin was not so
frightened as the other girl—they saw nothing, either,
of the wild beasts,—but Ingebjörg had quite lost her wits.
And now, when there was a fresh uproar in the throng, and
it was driven back by a whole troop of men from
the nearest dwellings who had armed themselves and
forced their way back over the bridge, some riding and
some running, and Ingebjörg nigh coming under the feet
of a horse—she gave a scream and set off running for the
woods. Kristin had never thought the girl could have
run so fast—it made her think of a hunted pig— She
ran after her, so that they two, at least, should not be
parted.</p>
<p class="c015">They were deep in the woods before Kristin could get
Ingebjörg to stop—they were on a little path which seemed
to lead down toward the road to Trælaborg. They stood
still for a little to get their breath again; Ingebjörg was
snivelling and weeping, and said she dared not go back
alone through the town and all the way out to the convent.</p>
<p class="c015">Nor did Kristin deem that this would be well, with the
streets in such commotion; she thought they must try to
find a house where they might hire a lad to take them home.
Ingebjörg thought there was a bridle-path to Trælaborg
further down by the shore, and along it there lay some
houses, she knew. So they followed the path downward,
away from the town.</p>
<p class="c015">Fearful and uneasy as they both were, it seemed to them
they had gone far ere at last they came to a farmstead
lying off in a field. In the courtyard there they found a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>band of men sitting drinking at a board under some ash
trees, while a woman came and went, bearing out tankards
to them. She looked wonderingly and sourly at the two
maids in convent habit, and none of the men seemed to
have a mind to go with them when Kristin told their need.
At last, though, two young men stood up and said they
would bring the girls to Nonneseter, if Kristin would give
them a silver ducat.</p>
<p class="c015">She heard by their speech that they were not Norse, but
she thought they seemed honest folk enough. ’Twas a
shameless sum they asked, she thought, but Ingebjörg was
beside herself with fright and she saw not how they could
go home alone so late; and so she struck the bargain.</p>
<p class="c015">No sooner were they come to the forest path than the
men drew closer to them and began to talk. Kristin liked
this but ill, but she would not show she was afraid; so
she answered them quietly, told of the pards and asked
the men where they were from. She spied about her, too,
and made as though she looked each moment to meet the
serving-men they had had with them—she talked as though
there had been a whole band. As they went on the men
spoke less and less—nor did she understand much of their
speech.</p>
<p class="c015">After a while she became aware that they were not going
the same way she had come with Ingebjörg—the course
their path took was not the same; ’twas more northerly—and
she deemed they had already gone much too
far.</p>
<p class="c015">Deep within her there smouldered a fear she dared not
let herself think upon—but it strengthened her strangely
to have Ingebjörg with her, for the girl was so foolish
that Kristin knew she must trust in herself alone to
find a way out for them both. Under her cloak, she managed
by stealth to pull out the cross with the holy relic
she had had of her father; she clasped it in her hand,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>praying fervently in her heart that they might soon meet
someone, and in all ways sought to gather all her courage
and to make no sign.</p>
<p class="c015">Just after this she saw that the path came out on to a
road and there was a clearing in the forest. The town
and the bay lay far below. The men had led them astray,
whether wilfully or because they knew not the paths—they
were high up on the mountain-side and far north of
Gjeita bridge, which she could see below; the road they
had now met seemed to lead thither.</p>
<p class="c015">Thereupon she stopped, drew forth her purse and made
to count out ten silver pennies into her hand.</p>
<p class="c015">“Now, good fellows,” said she, “we need you not any
more to guide us; for we know the way from here. We
thank you for your pains, and here is the wage we bargained
for. God be with you, good friends.”</p>
<p class="c015">The men looked at one another so foolishly, that Kristin
was near smiling. Then one said with an ugly grin that
the road down to the bridge was exceeding lonely; ’twas
not wise for them to go alone.</p>
<p class="c015">“None, surely, are such nithings or such fools that
they would seek to stop two maids, and they in the convent
habit,” answered Kristin. “We would fain go our
own way alone now—” and she held out the money.</p>
<p class="c015">The man caught her by the wrist, thrust his face close
up to hers, and said somewhat of “kuss” and “beutel”—Kristin
made out he was saying they might go in peace
if she but gave him a kiss and her purse.</p>
<p class="c015">She remembered Bentein’s face close to hers like this,
and such a fear came on her for a moment that she grew
faint and sick. But she pressed her lips together, and
called in her heart upon God and the Virgin Mary—and
in the same instant she thought she heard hoof-falls on the
path from the north.</p>
<p class="c015">She struck the man in the face with her purse so that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>he staggered—and then she pushed him in the breast with
all her strength so that he tumbled off the path and down
into the wood. The other German gripped her from behind,
tore the purse from her hand and her chain from
her neck so that it broke—she was near falling, but clutched
the man and tried to get her cross from him again. He
struggled to get free—the robbers, too, had now heard
folk coming—Ingebjörg screamed with all her might, and
the riders on the path came galloping forward at full
speed. They burst out of the thicket—three of them—and
Ingebjörg ran shrieking to meet them as they sprang from
their horses. Kristin knew one for the esquire of Didrek’s
loft; he drew his sword, seized the German she was struggling
with by the back of the neck, and threshed him with
the flat of his blade. His men ran after the other, caught
him and beat him to their hearts’ content.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin leaned against the face of the rock; she was
trembling now that all was over, but what she felt most
was marvel that her prayer had brought such speedy help.
Then she caught sight of Ingebjörg, who had thrown back
her hood, hung her cape loosely over her shoulders and
was in the act of bringing her heavy, shining plaits of
hair forward into sight upon her breast. At this sight
Kristin burst out a-laughing—her strength left her and
she had to hold on to a tree to keep her feet, for ’twas as
though the marrow of her bones was turned to water, she
felt so weak; and so she trembled and laughed and cried.</p>
<p class="c015">The esquire came forward and laid a hand warily upon
her shoulder:</p>
<p class="c015">“You were more frightened, I see, than you would show,”
said he, and his voice was kindly and gentle. “But now
you must take a hold on yourself—you bore you so bravely
while yet there was peril—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin could only look up at him and nod. He had
fine, bright eyes set in a narrow, pale-brown face, and coal-black
<span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>hair clipped somewhat short over the forehead and
behind the ears.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg had her hair in order now; she came and
thanked the stranger with many fair words. He stood
there still with a hand on Kristin’s shoulder while he answered
her comrade.</p>
<p class="c015">“We must take these birds along,” said he to his men,
who stood holding the two Germans—they were from a
Rostock ship, they said—“we must have them along with
us to the town that they may be sent to the black hole.
But first must we take these two maids home to the convent.
You can find some thongs, I trow, to bind them
with—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Mean you the maids, Erlend?” asked one of the men.
They were young, stout, well-appointed yeomen, and were
in high feather from the tussle.</p>
<p class="c015">Their master frowned and seemed about to answer
sharply, but Kristin laid her hand upon his sleeve:</p>
<p class="c015">“Let them go, dear sir!” She shuddered a little. “Loth
would we be, in truth, both my sister and I, this matter
should be talked of.”</p>
<p class="c015">The stranger looked down at her—he bit his lip and
nodded, as though he understood her. Then he gave each
of the captives a blow on the nape with the flat of his
sword which sent them sprawling forwards. “Run for it
then,” he said, kicking them, and both scrambled up and
took to their heels as fast as they could. Then he turned
again to the maidens and asked if they would please to
ride.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg let herself be lifted into Erlend’s saddle, but
it was soon plain that she could not keep her seat,—she
slid down again at once. He looked at Kristin doubtfully,
and she said that she was used to ride on a man’s saddle.</p>
<p class="c015">He took hold of her below the knees and lifted her up.
A sweet and happy thrill ran through her to feel how
<span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span>carefully he held her from him, as though afraid to come
near her—at home no one ever minded how tight they
held her when they helped her on to a horse. She felt
marvellously honoured and uplifted—</p>
<p class="c015">The knight—as Ingebjörg called him, though he had
but silver spurs—now offered that maiden his hand, and
his men sprang to their saddles. Ingebjörg would have
it that they should ride round the town to the northcard,
below the Ryenberg and Martestokke, and not through the
streets. First she gave as a reason that Sir Erlend and
his men were fully armed—were they not? The knight
answered gravely that the ban on carrying arms was not
over strict at any time—for travellers at least—and now
everyone in the town was out on a wild beast hunt—Then
she said she was fearful of the pards. Kristin
saw full well that Ingebjörg was fain to go by the longest
and loneliest road, that she might have the more talk
with Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“This is the second time this evening that we hinder
you, good sir,” said she, and Erlend answered soberly:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis no matter, I am bound no further than to Gerdarud
to-night—and ’tis light the whole night long.”</p>
<p class="c015">It liked Kristin well that he jested not, nor bantered
them, but talked to her as though she were his like or
even more than his like. She thought of Simon; she had
not met other young men of courtly breeding. But ’twas
true, this man seemed older than Simon—</p>
<p class="c015">They rode down into the valley below the Ryenberg
hills and up along the back. The path was narrow, and
the young bushes swung wet, heavily-scented branches
against her—it was a little darker down here, and the
air was cool and the leaves all dewy along the beck-path.</p>
<p class="c015">They went slowly, and the horses’ hoofs sounded muffled
on the damp, grass-grown path. She rocked gently in the
saddle; behind her she heard Ingebjörg’s chatter and the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span>stranger’s deep, quiet voice. He said little and answered
as if his mind wandered—it sounded almost as if his mood
were like her own, she thought—she felt strangely drowsy,
yet safe and content now that all the day’s chances were
safely over.</p>
<p class="c015">It was like waking to come out of the woods, on to the
green slopes under the Martestokke hills. The sun was
gone down and the town and the bay lay below them in
a clear, pale light—above the Aker ridges there was a
light-yellow strip edging the pale-blue sky. In the evening
hush, sounds were borne to them from far off as they
came out of the cool depths of the wood—a cart-wheel
creaked somewhere upon a road, dogs on the farms bayed
at each other across the valley. And from the woods behind
them birds trilled and sang full-throated, now the
sun was down.</p>
<p class="c015">Smoke was in the air from the fires on lands under
clearance, and out in a field there was the red flare of
a bonfire; against the great ruddy flame the clearness of
the night seemed a kind of darkness.</p>
<p class="c015">They were riding between the fences of the convent-fields
when the stranger spoke to her again. He asked
her what she thought best; should he go with her to the
gate and ask for speech of the Lady Groa, so that he
might tell her how this thing had come about. But Ingebjörg
would have it that they should steal in through
the church; then maybe they might slip into the convent
without anyone knowing they had been away so much too
long—it might be her kinsfolks’ visit had made Sister
Potentia forget them.</p>
<p class="c015">The open place before the west door of the church was
empty and still, and it came not into Kristin’s thoughts to
wonder at this, though there was wont to be much life
there of an evening with folks from the neighbourhood
who came to the nuns’ church, and round about were
houses wherein lay-servants and commoners dwelt. They
<span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span>said farewell to Erlend here. Kristin stood and stroked
his horse; it was black and had a comely head and soft
eyes—she thought it like Morvin, whom she had been
wont to ride at home when she was a child.</p>
<p class="c015">“What is your horse’s name, sir?” she asked, as it
turned its head from her and snuffed at its master’s
breast.</p>
<p class="c015">“Bayard,” said he, looking at her over the horse’s neck.
“You ask my horse’s name, but not mine?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I would be fain to know your name, sir,” she replied,
and bent her head a little.</p>
<p class="c015">“I am called Erlend Nikulaussön,” said he.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then, Erlend Nikulaussön, have thanks for your good
service this night,” said Kristin and proffered him her
hand.</p>
<p class="c015">Of a sudden she flushed red, and half withdrew her
hand from his.</p>
<p class="c015">“Lady Aashild Gautesdatter of Dovre, is she your kinswoman?”
she asked.</p>
<p class="c015">To her wonder she saw that he too blushed—he dropped
her hand suddenly and answered:</p>
<p class="c015">“She is my mother’s sister. And I am Erlend Nikulaussön
of Husaby.” He looked at her so strangely that
she became still more abashed, but she mastered herself
and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis true I should have thanked you with better words,
Erlend Nikulaussön; but I know not what I can say to
you—”</p>
<p class="c015">He bowed before her, and she felt that now she must
bid him good-bye, though she would fain have spoken
more with him. In the church-door she turned, and as
she saw that Erlend still stood beside his horse, she waved
her hand to him in farewell.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The convent was in a hubbub, and all within in great
dismay. Haakon had sent word home by a horseman,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span>while he himself went seeking the maids in the town; and
folks had been sent from the convent to help him. The
nuns had heard the wild beasts had killed and eaten
up two children down in the town. This, to be sure,
was a lie, and the pard—there was only one—had been
caught before vespers by some men from the King’s palace.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood with bent head and kept silence while the
Abbess and Sister Potentia poured out their wrath upon
the two maidens. She felt as though something were
asleep within her. Ingebjörg wept and began to make
excuse—they had gone out with Sister Potentia’s leave,
with fitting attendance, and, sure, they were not to blame
for what had happened after—</p>
<p class="c015">But Lady Groa said they might now stay in the church
till the hour of midnight struck, that they might strive to
turn their thoughts to the things of the spirit and might
thank God who had saved their lives and honour. “God
hath now manifested clearly to you the truth about the
world,” said she; “wild beasts and the servants of the
devil threaten his children there at every footstep, and
there is no salvation except ye hold fast to him with
prayer and supplication.”</p>
<p class="c015">She gave them each a lighted candle and bade them go
with Sister Cecilia Baardsdatter, who was often alone in
the church praying the whole night long.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin put her candle upon St. Lawrence’s altar and
knelt on the praying-stool. She fixed her gaze on the
flame while she said over the Paternoster and the Ave
Maria softly. The sheen of the candle seemed little by
little to enfold her and to shut out all that was outside
her and the light. She felt her heart open and overflow
with thankfulness and praise and love of God and His
gentle Mother—they came so near to her. She had always
known They saw her, but to-night she <i>felt</i> that it
<span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span>was so. She saw the world as in a vision; a great dark
room whereinto fell a sunbeam; the motes were dancing
in and out between the darkness and the light, and she
felt that now she had at last slipped into the sunbeam—</p>
<p class="c015">She felt she would gladly have stayed for ever in this
dark still church—with the few small spots of light like
golden stars in the night, the sweet stale scent of incense
and the warm smell of the burning wax. And she at rest
within her own star—</p>
<p class="c015">It was as if some great joy were at an end, when Sister
Cecilia came gliding to her and touched her shoulder.
Bending before the altars, the three women went out of
the little south-door into the convent close.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg was so sleepy that she went to bed without a
word. Kristin was glad—she had been loth to have her
good thoughts broken in on. And she was glad, too, that
they must keep on their shifts at night—Ingebjörg was so
fat and had been so over-hot.</p>
<p class="c015">She lay awake long, but the deep flood of sweetness that
she had left lifting her up as she knelt in the church
would not come again. Yet she felt the warmth of it
within her still, she thanked God with all her heart, and
thought she felt her spirit strengthened while she prayed
for her father and mother and sisters and for Arne Gyrdson’s
soul.</p>
<p class="c015">Father, she thought—she longed so much for him, for
all they had been to one another before Simon Darre
came into their lives. There welled up in her a new tenderness
for him—there was as it were a foretaste of
mother’s love and care in her love for her father this
night; dimly she felt that there was so much in life that
he had missed. She called to mind the old, black wooden
church at Gerdarud—she had seen there this last Easter
the graves of her three little brothers and of her grandmother,
her father’s own mother, Kristin Sigurdsdatter,
who died when she brought him into the world—</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span>What could Erlend Nikulaussön have to do at Gerdarud—she
could not think.</p>
<p class="c015">She had no knowledge that she had thought much of him
that evening, but the whole time the thought of his dark,
narrow face and his quiet voice had hung somewhere in the
dusk outside the glow of light that enfolded her spirit.</p>
<p class="c015">When she awoke the next morning, the sun was shining
into the dormitory, and Ingebjörg told her how Lady Groa
herself had bidden the lay-sisters not to wake them for
matins. She had said that when they woke they might go
over to the kitchen-house and get some food. Kristin
grew warm with gladness at the Abbess’ kindness—it seemed
as if the whole world had been good to her.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">3</h3>
<p class="c017">The farmer guild of Aker had St. Margaret for their
patroness, and they began their festival, each year on the
twentieth of July, the day of St. Margaret’s Mass. In
that day the guild-brothers and sisters, with their children,
their guests and their serving-folk, gathered at Aker’s
church and heard mass at St. Margaret’s Altar there; after
that they wended their way to the hall of the guild which
lay near the Hofvin hospital—there they were wont to hold
a drinking-feast lasting five days.</p>
<p class="c015">But since both Aker’s church and the Hofvin spital
belonged to Nonneseter, and as, besides, many of the Aker
farmers were tenants of the convent, it had come to be the
custom that the Abbess and some of the elder Sisters should
honour the guild by coming to the feasting on the first day.
And those of the young maids who were at the convent only
to learn, and were not to take the veil, had leave to go with
them and to dance in the evening; therefore at this feast
they wore their own clothes and not the convent habit.</p>
<p class="c015">And so there was great stir and bustle in the novices’
<span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span>sleeping rooms on the eve of St. Margaret’s Mass; the maids
who were to go to the guild feast ransacking their chests
and making ready their finery, while the others, less
fortunate, went about something moodily and looked on.
Some had set small pots in the fireplace and were boiling
water to make their skin white and soft; others were making
a brew to be smeared on the hair—then they parted the
hair into strands and twisted them tightly round strips of
leather, and this gave them curling, wavy tresses.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg brought out all the finery she had, but could
not think what she should wear—come what might, not her
best leaf-green velvet dress; that was too good and too
costly for such a peasant rout. But a little, thin sister who
was not to go with them—Helga was her name; she had
been vowed to the convent by her father and mother while
still a child—took Kristin aside and whispered: she was
sure Ingebjörg would wear the green dress and her pink
silk shift too.</p>
<p class="c015">“You have ever been kind to me, Kristin,” said Helga.
“It beseems me little to meddle in such doings—but I will
tell you none the less. The knight who brought you home
that evening in the spring—I have seen and heard Ingebjörg
talking with him since—they spoke together in the church,
and he has tarried for her up in the hollow when she hath
gone to Ingunn at the commoners’ house. But ’tis you he
asks for, and Ingebjörg has promised him to bring you there
along with her. But I wager you have not heard aught of
this before!”</p>
<p class="c015">“True it is that Ingebjörg has said naught of this,” said
Kristin. She pursed up her mouth that the other might
not see the smile that would come out. So this was
Ingebjörg’s way—“’Tis like she knows I am not of such
as run to trysts with strange men round house-corners
and behind fences,” said she proudly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then I might have spared myself the pains of bringing
you tidings whereof ’twould have been but seemly I
<span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span>should say no word,” said Helga, wounded, and they parted.</p>
<p class="c015">But the whole evening Kristin was put to it not to smile
when anyone was looking at her.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Next morning Ingebjörg went dallying about in her shift,
till Kristin saw she meant not to dress before she herself
was ready.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin said naught, but laughed as she went to her chest
and took out her golden-yellow silken shift. She had never
worn it before, and it felt so soft and cool as it slipped
down over her body. It was broidered with goodly work,
in silver and blue and brown silk, about the neck and down
upon the breast, as much as should be seen above the
low-cut gown. There were sleeves to match, too. She
drew on her linen hose, and laced up the small, purple-blue
shoes which Haakon, by good luck, had saved that
day of commotion. Ingebjörg gazed at her—then Kristin
said laughing:</p>
<p class="c015">“My father ever taught me never to show disdain of
those beneath us—but ’tis like you are too grand to deck
yourself in your best for poor tenants and peasant-folk—”</p>
<p class="c015">Red as a berry, Ingebjörg slipped her woollen smock
down over her white hips and hurried on the pink silk
shift.—Kristin threw over her own head her best velvet
gown—it was violet-blue, deeply cut-out at the bosom, with
long slashed sleeves flowing wellnigh to the ground. She
fastened the gilt belt about her waist, and hung her grey
squirrel cape over her shoulders. Then she spread her
masses of yellow hair out over her shoulders and back
and fitted the golden fillet, chased with small roses, upon
her brow.</p>
<p class="c015">She saw that Helga stood watching them. Then she
took from her chest a great silver clasp. It was that she
had on her cloak the night Bentein met her on the highway,
and she had never cared to wear it since. She went
to Helga and said in a low voice:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span>“I know ’twas your wish to show me goodwill last night;
think me not unthankful—,” and with that she gave her
the clasp.</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg was a fine sight, too, when she stood fully
decked in her green gown, with a red silk cloak over her
shoulders and her fair, curly hair waving behind her.
They had ended by striving to outdress each other, thought
Kristin, and she laughed.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The morning was cool and fresh with dew as the procession
went forth from Nonneseter and wound its way
westward toward Frysja. The hay-making was near at an
end here on the lowlands, but along the fences grew blue-bells
and yellow crowsfoot in clumps; in the fields the
barley was in ear and bent its heads in pale silvery waves
just tinged with pink. Here and there, where the path
was narrow and led through the fields, the corn all but
met about folks’ knees.</p>
<p class="c015">Haakon walked at the head, bearing the convent’s banner
with the Virgin Mary’s picture upon the blue silken
cloth. After him walked the servants and the commoners,
and then came the Lady Groa and four old sisters on horseback,
while behind these came the young maidens on foot;
their many-hued holiday attire flaunted and shone in the
sunlight. Some of the commoners’ women-folk and a few
armed serving-men closed the train.</p>
<p class="c015">They sang as they went over the bright fields, and the
folk they met at the by-ways stood aside and gave them
reverent greeting. All round, out on the fields, they could
see small groups of men coming walking and riding, for
folks were drawing toward the church from every house
and every farm. Soon they heard behind them the sound
of hymns chanted in men’s deep voices, and the banner
of the Hovedö monastery rose above a hillock—the red
silk shone in the sun, swaying and bending to the step of
the bearer.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span>The mighty, metal voice of the bells rang out above the
neighing and screaming of stallions as the procession
climbed the last slope to the church. Kristin had never
seen so many horses at one time—a heaving, restless sea
of horses’ backs round about the green before the church-door.
Upon the sward stood and sat and lay folk
dressed in all their best—but all rose in reverence as the
Virgin’s flag from Nonneseter was borne in amongst them,
and all bowed deeply before the Lady Groa.</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed as though more folk had come than the church
could hold, but for those from the convent room had been
kept in front near the altar. Straightway after them the
Cistercian monks from Hovedö marched in and went up into
the choir—and forthwith song burst from the throats
of men and boys and filled the church.</p>
<p class="c015">Soon after the mass had begun, when the service brought
all to their feet, Kristin caught sight of Erlend Nikulaussön.
He was tall, and his head rose above those about
him—she saw his face from the side. He had a high,
steep and narrow forehead, and a large, straight nose—it
jutted, triangle-like, from his face, and was strangely
thin about the fine, quivering nostrils—something about
it reminded Kristin of a restless, high-strung stallion.
His face was not as comely as she had thought it—the
long-drawn lines running down to his small, weak, yet
well-formed mouth gave it as ’twere a touch of joylessness—aye,
but yet, he <i>was</i> comely.</p>
<p class="c015">He turned his head and saw her. She knew not how
long they stood thus, looking into each other’s eyes. From
that time she thought of naught but the end of the mass;
she waited, intent on what would then befall.</p>
<p class="c015">There was some pressing and thronging as the folks
made their way out from the over-crowded church. Ingebjörg
held Kristin back till they were at the rear of the
throng; she gained her point—they were quite cut off from
the nuns, who went out first—the two girls were among
<span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>the last in coming to the offertory-box and out of the
church.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend stood without, just by the door, beside the priest
from Gerdarud and a stoutish, red-faced man, splendid
in blue velvet. Erlend himself was clad in silk, but of
a sober hue—a long coat of brown, figured with black,
and a black cloak with a pattern of small yellow hawks
inwoven.</p>
<p class="c015">They greeted each other and crossed the green together
to where the men’s horses stood tethered. While they
spoke of the fine weather, the goodly mass and the great
crowd of folk that were mustered, the fat, ruddy knight—he
bore golden spurs and was named Sir Munan Baardsön—took
Ingebjörg by the hand; ’twas plain he was
mightily taken with the maid. Erlend and Kristin fell
behind—they were silent as they walked.</p>
<p class="c015">There was a great to-do upon the church-green as folk
began to ride away—horses jostled one another, people
shouted—some angry, others laughing. Many sat in pairs
upon the horses; men had their wives behind them, or
their children in front upon the saddle; youths swung
themselves up beside a friend. They could see the church
banners, the nuns and the priests far down the hill already.</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Munan rode by; Ingebjörg sat in front of him, his
arm about her. Both of them called out and waved.
Then Erlend said:</p>
<p class="c015">“My serving-men are both with me—they could ride
one horse and you have Haftor’s—if you would rather
have it so?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin flushed as she replied: “We are so far behind
the others already—I see not your serving-men hereabouts,
and—” Then she broke into a laugh, and Erlend smiled.</p>
<p class="c015">He sprang to the saddle and helped her to a seat behind
him. At home Kristin had often sat thus sidewise
behind her father, after she had grown too big to ride
astride the horse. Still she felt a little bashful and none
<span class="pageno" id="Page_140">140</span>too safe as she laid a hand upon Erlend’s shoulder; the
other she put on the horse’s back to steady herself. They
rode slowly down towards the bridge.</p>
<p class="c015">In a while Kristin thought she must speak, since he
was silent, so she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“We looked not, sir, to meet you here to-day.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Looked you not to meet me?” asked Erlend, turning
his head. “Did not Ingebjörg Filippusdatter bear you
my greeting then?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Kristin. “I heard naught of any greeting—she
hath not named you once since you came to our help
last May—,” said she, guilefully—she was not sorry that
Ingebjörg’s falseness should come to light.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend did not look back again, but she could hear by
his voice that he was smiling when he asked again:</p>
<p class="c015">“But the little dark one—the novice—I mind not her
name—her I even feed to bear you my greeting.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin blushed, but she had to laugh too: “Aye, ’tis
but Helga’s due I should say that she earned her fee,” she
said.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend moved his head a little—his neck almost touched
her hand. Kristin shifted her hand at once further out on
his shoulder. Somewhat uneasily she thought, maybe she
had been more bold than was fitting, seeing she had come
to this feast after a man had, in a manner, made tryst
with her there.</p>
<p class="c015">Soon after Erlend asked:</p>
<p class="c015">“Will you dance with me to-night, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not, sir,” answered the maid.</p>
<p class="c015">“You think, mayhap, ’tis not seemly?” he asked, and,
as she did not answer, he said again: “It may well be it
is not so. But I thought now maybe you might deem
you would be none the worse if you took my hand in the
dance to-night. But indeed ’tis eight years since I stood
up to dance.”</p>
<p class="c015">“How may that be, sir?” asked Kristin. “Mayhap you
<span class="pageno" id="Page_141">141</span>are wedded?” But then it came into her head that had
he been a wedded man, to have made tryst with her thus
would have been no fair deed of him. On that she tried
to mend her speech, saying: “Maybe, you have lost your
betrothed maid or your wife?”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend turned quickly and looked on her with strange
eyes:</p>
<p class="c015">“Hath not Lady Aashild—? Why grew you so red when
you heard who I was that evening,” he asked a little after.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin flushed red once more, but did not answer; then
Erlend asked again:</p>
<p class="c015">“I would fain know what my mother’s sister said to
you of me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Naught else,” said Kristin quickly, “but in your praise.
She said you were so comely and so great of kin that—she
said that beside such as you and her kin we were of no
such great account—my folk and I—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Doth she still talk thus, living the life she lives,” said
Erlend, and laughed bitterly. “Aye, aye—if it comfort
her—Said she naught else of me?”</p>
<p class="c015">“What should she have said?” asked Kristin—she knew
not why she was grown so strangely heavy-hearted.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, she must have said”—he spoke in a low voice,
looking down, “she might have said that I had been under
the Church’s ban, and had to pay dear for peace and atonement—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was silent a long time. Then she said softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“There is many a man who is not master of his own
fortunes—so have I heard said. ’Tis little I have seen of
the world—but I will never believe of you, Erlend, that
’twas for any—dishonourable—deed.”</p>
<p class="c015">“May God reward you for those words, Kristin,” said
Erlend, and bent his head and kissed her wrist so vehemently
that the horse gave a bound beneath them. When
Erlend had it in hand again, he said earnestly: “Dance
with me to-night then, Kristin. Afterwards I will tell how
<span class="pageno" id="Page_142">142</span>things are with me—will tell you all—but to-night we
will be happy together?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin answered: “Aye,” and they rode a while in
silence.</p>
<p class="c015">But ere long Erlend began to ask of Lady Aashild, and
Kristin told all she knew of her; she praised her much.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then all doors are not barred against Björn and
Aashild?” asked Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin said they were thought much of, and that her
father and many with him deemed that most of the tales
about these two were untrue.</p>
<p class="c015">“How liked you my kinsman, Munan Baardsön?” asked
Erlend laughing slily.</p>
<p class="c015">“I looked not much upon him,” said Kristin, “and methought,
too, he was not much to look on.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Knew you not,” asked Erlend, “that he is her son?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Son to Lady Aashild!” said Kristin, in great wonder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, her children could not take their mother’s fair
looks, though they took all else,” said Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have never known her first husband’s name,” said
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“They were two brothers who wedded two sisters,” said
Erlend. “Baard and Nikulaus Munansön. My father was
the elder, my mother was his second wife, but he had no
children by his first. Baard, whom Aashild wedded, was
not young either, nor, I trow, did they ever live happily together—aye,
I was a little child when all this befell, they
hid from me as much as they could—But she fled the
land with Sir Björn and married him against the will of
her kin—when Baard was dead. Then folk would have
had the wedding set aside—they made out that Björn had
sought her bed while her first husband was still living
and that they had plotted together to put away my father’s
brother. ’Tis clear they could not bring this home to them,
since they had to leave them together in wedlock. But
to make amends, they had to forfeit all their estate—Björn
<span class="pageno" id="Page_143">143</span>had killed their sister’s son too—my mother’s and Aashild’s,
I mean—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s heart beat hard. At home her father and
mother had kept strict watch that no unclean talk should
come to the ears of their children or of young folk—but
still things had happened in their own parish and Kristin
had heard of them—a man had lived in adultery with a
wedded woman. That was whoredom, one of the worst of
sins; ’twas said they plotted the husband’s death, and
that brought with it outlawry and the Church’s ban. Lavrans
had said no woman was bound to stay with her husband,
if he had had to do with another’s wife; the state
of a child gotten in adultery could never be mended, not
even though its father and mother were free to wed afterward.
A man might bring into his family and make his
heir his child by any wanton or strolling beggar woman,
but not the child of his adultery—not if its mother came
to be a knight’s lady—She thought of the misliking she
had ever felt for Sir Björn with his bleached face and fat,
yet shrunken body. She could not think how Lady Aashild
could be so good and yielding at all times to the man
who had led her away into such shame; how such a gracious
woman could have let herself be beguiled by him.
He was not even good to her; he let her toil and moil with
all the farm work; Björn did naught but drink beer. Yet
Aashild was ever mild and gentle when she spoke with her
husband. Kristin wondered if her father could know all
this, since he had asked Sir Björn to their home. Now
she came to think, too, it seemed strange Erlend should
think fit to tell such tales of his near kin. But like
enough he deemed she knew of it already—</p>
<p class="c015">“I would like well,” said Erlend in a while, “to visit
her, Moster Aashild, some day—when I journey northwards.
Is he comely still, Björn, my kinsman?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Kristin. “He looks like hay that has lain
the winter through upon the fields.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_144">144</span>“Aye, aye, it tells upon a man, I trow,” said Erlend, with
the same bitter smile. “Never have I seen so fair a man—’tis
twenty years since, I was but a lad then—but his like
have I never seen—”</p>
<p class="c015">A little after they came to the hospital. It was an exceeding
great and fine place, with many houses both of
stone and of wood—houses for the sick, almhouses, hostels
for travellers, a chapel and a house for the priest. There
was great bustle in the courtyard, for food was being
made ready in the kitchen of the hospital for the guild feast,
and the poor and sick too, that were dwelling in the
place, were to be feasted on the best this day.</p>
<p class="c015">The hall of the guild was beyond the garden of the
hospital, and folks took their way thither through the
herb-garden, for this was of great renown. Lady Groa
had had brought hither plants that no one had heard of in
Norway before, and moreover all plants that else folks
were used to grow in gardens, throve better in her herbaries,
both flowers and pot-herbs and healing herbs. She
was a most learned woman in all such matters and had herself
put into the Norse tongue the herbals of the Salernitan
school—Lady Groa had been more than ever kind to
Kristin since she had marked that the maid knew somewhat
of herb-lore and was fain to know yet more of it.</p>
<p class="c015">So Kristin named for Erlend what grew in the beds on
either side the grassy path they walked on. In the midday
sun there was a warm and spicy scent of dill and
celery, garlic and roses, southernwood and wallflower. Beyond
the shadeless, baking herb-garden the fruit orchards
looked cool and enticing—red cherries gleamed amid the
dark leafy tops, and the apple trees drooped their
branches heavy with green fruit.</p>
<p class="c015">About the garden was a hedge of sweet briar. There
were some flowers on it still—they looked the same as
other briar-roses, but in the sun the leaves smelt of wine
and apples. Folk plucked sprays to deck themselves as
<span class="pageno" id="Page_145">145</span>they went past. Kristin, too, took some roses and hung
them on her temples, fixed under her golden fillet. One
she kept in her hand—After a time Erlend took it, saying
no word. A while he bore it in his hand as they walked,
then fastened it with the brooch upon his breast—he looked
awkward and bashful as he did it, and was so clumsy
that he pricked his fingers till they bled.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Broad tables were spread in the loft-room of the guild’s
hall—two by the main-walls, for the men and the women;
and two smaller boards out on the floor, where children
and young folk sat side by side.</p>
<p class="c015">At the women’s board Lady Groa was in the high-seat,
the nuns and the chief of the married women sat on the inner
bench along the wall, and the unwedded women on
the outer benches, the maids from Nonneseter at the upper
end. Kristin knew that Erlend was watching her, but
she durst not turn her head even once, either when they
rose or when they sat down. Only when they got up at
last to hear the priest read the names of the dead guild-brothers
and sisters, she stole a hasty glance at the men’s
table—she caught a glimpse of him where he stood by
the wall, behind the candles burning on the board. He
was looking at her.</p>
<p class="c015">The meal lasted long, with all the toasts in honour of
God, the Virgin Mary, and St. Margaret and St. Olav and
St. Halvard, and prayers and song between.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin saw through the open door that the sun was
gone; sounds of fiddling and song came in from the green
without, and all the young folks had left the tables already
when Lady Groa said to the convent maidens that they
might go now and play themselves for a time if they listed.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Three red bonfires were burning upon the green; around
them moved the many-coloured chains of dancers. The
fiddlers sat aloft on heaped-up chests and scraped their
<span class="pageno" id="Page_146">146</span>fiddles—they played and sang a different tune in every
ring; there were too many folk for <i>one</i> dance. It was
nearly dark already—northward the wooded ridge stood
out coal-black against the yellow-green sky.</p>
<p class="c015">Under the loft-balcony folk were sitting drinking.
Some men sprang forward, as soon as the six maids from
Nonneseter came down the steps. Munan Baardsön flew
to meet Ingebjörg and went off with her, and Kristin was
caught by the wrist—Erlend, she knew his hand already.
He pressed her hand in his so that their rings grated on
one another and bruised the flesh.</p>
<p class="c015">He drew her with him to the outermost bonfire. Many
children were dancing there; Kristin gave her other hand
to a twelve-year old lad, and Erlend had a little, half-grown
maid on his other side.</p>
<p class="c015">No one was singing in the ring just then—they were
swaying in and out to the tune of the fiddle as they moved
round. Then someone shouted that Sivord the Dane
should sing them a new dance. A tall, fair-haired man
with huge fists stepped out in front of the chain and struck
up his ballad:</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c018">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">Fair goes the dance at Munkholm</div>
<div class="line in4">On silver sand.</div>
<div class="line">There danceth Ivar Sir Alfsön—</div>
<div class="line in4">Holds the Queen’s own hand.</div>
<div class="line in8"><i>Know ye not Ivar Sir Alfsön?</i></div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c017">The fiddlers knew not the tune, they thrummed their
strings a little, and the Dane sang alone—he had a strong,
tuneful voice.</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c018">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“Mind you, Queen of the Danemen,</div>
<div class="line in4">That summer fair,</div>
<div class="line">They led you out of Sweden,</div>
<div class="line in4">To Denmark here?</div>
</div>
<div class="group">
<div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_147">147</span>“They led you out of Sweden</div>
<div class="line in4">To Denmark here,</div>
<div class="line">All with a crown of the red gold</div>
<div class="line in4">And many a tear.</div>
</div>
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“All with a crown of the red gold</div>
<div class="line in4">And tear-filled eyne—</div>
<div class="line">—Mind you, Queen of the Danemen,</div>
<div class="line in4">You first were mine?”</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c017">The fiddles struck in again, the dancers hummed the
new-learned tune and joined in the burden.</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c018">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“And are you, Ivar Sir Alfsön,</div>
<div class="line in4">Sworn man to me,</div>
<div class="line">Then shall you hang to-morrow</div>
<div class="line in4">On the gallows tree!”</div>
</div>
<div class="group">
<div class="line">But ’twas Ivar Sir Alfsön,</div>
<div class="line in4">All unafraid</div>
<div class="line">He leaped into the gold-bark</div>
<div class="line in4">In harness clad.</div>
</div>
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“God send to you, oh Dane-Queen,</div>
<div class="line in4">So many a good-night,</div>
<div class="line">As in the high heavens</div>
<div class="line in4">Are stars alight.</div>
</div>
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“God send to you, oh Dane-King,</div>
<div class="line in4">So many ill years</div>
<div class="line">As be leaves on the linden—</div>
<div class="line in4">Or the hind hath hairs.”</div>
<div class="line in8"><i>Know ye not Ivar Sir Alfsön?</i></div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c017">It was far on in the night, and the fires were but heaps
of embers growing more and more black. Kristin and
Erlend stood hand in hand under the trees by the garden
fence. Behind them the noise of the revellers was hushed—a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_148">148</span>few young lads were hopping round the glowing
mounds singing softly, but the fiddlers had sought their
resting-places and most of the people were gone. One or
two wives went round seeking their husbands, who were
lying somewhere out of doors overcome by the beer.</p>
<p class="c015">“Where think you I can have laid my cloak?” whispered
Kristin. Erlend put his arm about her waist and drew his
mantle round them both. Close pressed to one another
they went into the herb-garden.</p>
<p class="c015">A lingering breath of the day’s warm spicy scents, deadened
and damp with the chill of the dew, met them in
there. The night was very dark, the sky overcast, with
murky grey clouds close down upon the tree-tops. But
they could tell that there were other folks in the garden.
Once Erlend pressed the maiden close to him and asked
in a whisper:</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you not afraid, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">In her mind she caught a faint glimpse of the world
outside this night—and knew that this was madness. But
a blessed strengthlessness was upon her. She leaned
closer to the man and whispered softly—she herself
knew not what.</p>
<p class="c015">They came to the end of the path; a stone wall divided
them from the woods. Erlend helped her up. As she
jumped down on the other side, he caught her and held
her lifted in his arms a moment before he set her on the
grass.</p>
<p class="c015">She stood with upturned face to take his kiss. He held
her head between his hands—it was so sweet to her to feel
his fingers sink into her hair—she felt she must repay
him, and so she clasped his head and sought to kiss him,
as he had kissed her.</p>
<p class="c015">When he put his hands upon her breast, she felt as
though he drew her heart from out her bosom; he parted
the folds of silk ever so little and laid a kiss betwixt them—it
sent a glow into her inmost soul.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_149">149</span>“You I could never harm,” whispered Erlend. “You
should never shed a tear through fault of mine. Never
had I dreamed a maid might be so good as you, my Kristin—”</p>
<p class="c015">He drew her down into the grass beneath the bushes;
they sat with their backs against the wall. Kristin said
naught, but when he ceased from caressing her, she put
up her hand and touched his face.</p>
<p class="c015">In a while Erlend asked: “Are you not weary, my dear
one?” And when Kristin nestled in to his breast, he folded
his arms around her and whispered: “Sleep, sleep, Kristin,
here in my arms—”</p>
<p class="c015">She slipped deeper and deeper into darkness and
warmth and happiness upon his breast.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">When she came to herself again, she was lying outstretched
in the grass with her cheek upon the soft brown
silk above his knees. Erlend was sitting as before with
his back to the stone wall, his face looked grey in the grey
twilight, but his wide opened eyes were marvellously clear
and fair. She saw he had wrapped his cloak all about
her—her feet were so warm and snug with the fur lining
around them.</p>
<p class="c015">“Now have you slept in my lap,” said he smiling faintly.
“May God bless you, Kristin—you slept as safe as a child
in its mother’s arms—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have <i>you</i> not slept, Sir Erlend?” asked Kristin, and
he smiled down into her fresh-opened eyes:</p>
<p class="c015">“Maybe the night will come when you and I may lie
down to sleep together—I know not what you will think
when you have weighed all things.—I have watched by
you to-night—there is still so much betwixt us two that
’tis more than if there had lain a naked sword between
you and me—Tell me if you will hold me dear, when
this night is past?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I will hold you dear, Sir Erlend.” said Kristin, “I
<span class="pageno" id="Page_150">150</span>will hold you dear, so long as you will—and thereafter
I will love none other—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then,” said Erlend slowly, “may God forsake me if
any, maid or woman, come to my arms ere I may make
you mine in law and honour—Say you this too,” he
prayed. Kristin said:</p>
<p class="c015">“May God forsake me if I take any other man to my
arms so long as I live on earth.”</p>
<p class="c015">“We must go now,” said Erlend a little after, “—before
folk waken—”</p>
<p class="c015">They passed along without the wall among the bushes.</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you bethought you,” asked Erlend, “what further
must be done in this?”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis for you to say what we must do, Erlend,” answered
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Your father,” he asked in a little, “they say at Gerdarud
he is a mild and a righteous man. Think you he
will be so exceeding loth to go back from what he hath
agreed with Andres Darre?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Father has said so often, he would never force us, his
daughters,” said Kristin. “The chief thing is that our
lands and Simon’s lie so fitly together. But I trow father
would not that I should miss all my gladness in this
world for the sake of that.” A fear stirred within her that
so simple as this perhaps it might not prove to be—but she
fought it down.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then maybe ’twill be less hard than I deemed in the
night,” said Erlend. “God help me, Kristin—methinks I
<i>cannot</i> lose you now—unless I win you now, never can I
be glad again.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They parted among the trees, and in the dawning light
Kristin found her way to the guest-chamber where the
women from Nonneseter were to lie. All the beds were
full, but she threw a cloak upon some straw on the floor
and laid her down in all her clothes.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_151">151</span>When she awoke, it was far on in the day. Ingebjörg
Filippusdatter was sitting on a bench near by stitching
down an edge of fur, that had been torn loose on her
cloak. She was full of talk as ever.</p>
<p class="c015">“Were you with Erlend Nikulaussön the whole night?”
she asked. “’Twere well you went warily with that lad,
Kristin—how think you Simon Andressön would like it if
you came to be dear friends with him?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin found a hand-basin and began to wash herself.</p>
<p class="c015">“And your betrothed—think you he would like that
you danced with Dumpy Munan last night? Surely we
must dance with him who chooses us out on such a night
of merry-making—and Lady Groa had given us leave—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ingebjörg pshawed:</p>
<p class="c015">“Einar Einarssön and Sir Munan are friends—and besides
he is wedded and old. Ugly he is to boot for that
matter—but likable and hath becoming ways—see what
he gave me for a remembrance of last night,” and she held
forth a gold clasp which Kristin had seen in Sir Munan’s
hat the day before. “But this Erlend—’tis true he was
freed of the ban at Easter last year, but they say Eline
Ormsdatter has been with him at Husaby since—Sir Munan
says Erlend hath fled to Sira Jon at Gerdarud, and he
deems ’tis because he cannot trust himself not to fall back
into sin, if he meet her again—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin crossed over to the other—her face was white.</p>
<p class="c015">“Knew you not this?” said Ingebjörg. “That he lured
a woman from her husband somewhere in Haalogaland in
the North—and held her with him at his manor in despite
of the King’s command and the Archbishop’s ban—they
had two children together—and he was driven to fly to
Sweden and hath been forced to pay in forfeit so much
of his lands and goods Sir Munan says he will be a poor
man in the end unless he mend his ways the sooner—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think not but that I know all this,” said Kristin with
a set face. “But ’tis known the matter is ended now—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_152">152</span>“Aye, but as to that Sir Munan said, there had been an
end between them so many times before,” said Ingebjörg
pensively. “But all these things can be nothing to you—you
that are to wed Simon Darre. But a comely man is
Erlend Nikulaussön, sure enough—”</p>
<p class="c015">The company from Nonneseter was to set out for
home that same day after nones. Kristin had promised
Erlend to meet him by the wall where they had sat the
night before, if she could but find a way to come.</p>
<p class="c015">He was lying face downwards in the grass with his head
upon his hands. As soon as he saw her, he sprang to
his feet and held out both his hands, as she was about
jumping from the wall.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin took them, and the two stood a little, hand in
hand. Then said Kristin:</p>
<p class="c015">“Why did you tell me that of Sir Björn and Lady Aashild
yesterday?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I can see you know it all,” said Erlend and let go her
hands suddenly. “What think you of me now, Kristin—?</p>
<p class="c015">“I was eighteen then,” he went on vehemently, “’tis ten
years since that the King, my kinsman, sent me with the
mission to Vargöyhus—and we stayed the winter at Steigen—she
was wife to the Lagmand, Sigurd Saksulvsön—I
thought pity of her, for he was old and ugly beyond belief—I
know not how it came to pass—aye; but I loved
her too. I bade Sigurd crave what amends he would; I
would fain have done right by him—he is a good and
doughty man in many ways—but he would have it that
all must go by law; he took the matter to the King—I
was to be branded for whoredom with the wife of him
whose guest I had been, you understand—</p>
<p class="c015">“Then it came to my father’s ears and then to King
Haakon’s—he—he drove me from his court. And if you
must know the whole—there is naught more now betwixt
Eline and me save the children, and she cares not much
for them. They are in Österdal, upon a farm I owned
<span class="pageno" id="Page_153">153</span>there; I have given it to Orm, the boy—but she will not
stay with them—Doubtless she reckons that Sigurd
cannot live for ever—but I know not what she would
be at.</p>
<p class="c015">“Sigurd took her back again—but she says she fared like
a dog and a bondwoman in his house—so she set a tryst
with me at Nidaros. ’Twas little better for me at Husaby
with my father—I sold all I could lay hands on, and
fled with her to Halland—Count Jacob stood my friend—Could
I do aught else—she was great with my child. I
knew many a man had lived even so with another’s wife
and had got off cheap enough—if he were rich that is—But
so it is with King Haakon, he is hardest upon his
own kin. We were away from one another for a year,
but then my father died and then she came back. Then
there were other troubles. My tenants denied me rent and
would have no speech with my bailiffs because I lay under
ban—I on my side dealt harshly with them, and so
they brought suit against me for robbery; but I had not
the money to pay my house-folk withal; and you can see
I was too young to meet these troubles wisely, and my
kinsfolk would not help me—save Munan—he did all his
wife would let him—</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, now you know it, Kristin: I have lost much both
of lands and goods and of honour. True it is; you would
be better served if you held fast to Simon Andressön.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin put her arms about his neck:</p>
<p class="c015">“We will abide by what we swore to each other yester-night,
Erlend—if so be you think as I do.”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend drew her close to him, kissed her and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“You will see too, trust me, that all things will be
changed with me now—for none in the world has power
on me now but you. Oh, my thoughts were many last
night, as you slept upon my lap, my fairest one. So much
power the devil cannot have over a man, that I should
ever work you care and woe—you, my dearest life—”</p>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_154">154</span>
<h3 class="c013">4</h3>
</div>
<p class="c017">At the time he dwelt at Skog Lavrans Björgulfsön had
made gifts of land to Gerdarud church that masses for the
souls of his father and mother might be said on their
death-days. Björgulf Ketilsön’s day was the thirteenth of
August, and Lavrans had settled with his brother that this
year Aasmund should bring Kristin out to Skog that she
might be at the mass.</p>
<p class="c015">She went in fear that something should come in the way,
so that her uncle would not keep his promise—she thought
she had marked that Aasmund did not care over much about
her. But the day before the mass was to be, Aasmund
Björgulfsön came to the convent to fetch his brother’s
daughter. Kristin was told to clothe herself in lay garb,
but simply and in dark garments. There had been some
carping at the Sisters of Nonneseter for going about too
much without the convent walls; therefore the bishop had
given order that the maidens who were not to take the veil
must wear naught like to the habit of the order when they
went visiting their kinsfolk—so that laymen could not mistake
them for novices or nuns.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s heart was full of gladness as she rode along the
highway with her uncle, and Aasmund grew more friendly
and merry with her when he saw the maid was not so
tongue-tied after all, with folk. Otherwise Aasmund was
somewhat moody and downcast; he said it looked as though
there would be a call to arms in the autumn and that the
King would lead an army into Sweden to avenge the slaying
of his son-in-law and the husband of his niece. Kristin had
heard of the murder of the Swedish Dukes, and thought it
a most foul deed—yet all these questions of state seemed far
away from her. No one spoke much of such things at
home in the Dale; she remembered, too, that her father
<span class="pageno" id="Page_155">155</span>had been to the war against Duke Eirik at Ragnhildarholm
and Konungahella. Then Aasmund told her of all that
had come and gone between the King and the Dukes.
Kristin understood but little of this, but she gave careful
heed to all her uncle told of the making and breaking of
the betrothals of the King’s daughters. It gave her comfort
to think ’twas not everywhere as it was at home in her
countryside, that a betrothal once fixed by word of mouth
was held to bind nigh as fast as a wedding. Then she
took courage to tell of her adventure on the evening before
Halvard-wake, and asked her uncle if he knew Erlend of
Husaby. Aasmund spoke well of Erlend—said, he had
guided his affairs unwisely, but his father and the King
were most to blame; they had borne themselves as
though the young lad were a very limb of the devil only
because he had fallen into this misfortune. The King was
over pious in such matters, and Sir Nikulaus was angry
because Erlend had lost much good land, so they had
thundered about whoredom and hell fire—“and there must
be a bit of the dare-devil in every likely lad,” said Aasmund
Björgulfsön. “And the woman was most fair. But
you have no call now to look Erlend’s way, so trouble
yourself no more about his doings.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Erlend came not to the mass, as he had promised Kristin
he would, and she thought about this more than of God’s
word. She felt no sorrow that this was so—she had only
that strange new feeling that she was cut off from all the
ties that she had felt binding on her before.</p>
<p class="c015">She tried to take comfort—like enough Erlend deemed
it wisest that no one in whose charge she was should come
to know of their friendship at this time. She could understand
herself that ’twas wise. But her heart had longed
so for him, and she wept when she had gone to rest in the
loft-room where she was to sleep with Aasmund’s little
daughters.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_156">156</span>The day after, she went up into the wood with the
youngest of her uncle’s children, a little maid of six years.
When they were come to the pastures among the woods
a little way off, Erlend came running after them. Kristin
knew it was he before she had seen who was coming.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have sat up here on the hill spying down into the
courtyard the whole day,” said he. “I thought surely
you would find a chance to come out—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you I came out to meet you then?” said Kristin,
laughing. “And are you not afraid to beat about my
uncle’s woods with dogs and bow?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Your uncle gave me leave to take my pastime hunting
here,” said Erlend. “And the dogs are Aasmund’s—they
found me out this morning.” He patted them and lifted
the little girl up in his arms.</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>You</i> know me, Ragndid? But say not you have spoken
with me, and you can have this”—and he took out a
bunch of raisins and gave them to the child. “I had
brought them for you,” he said to Kristin. “Think you
this child can hold her tongue?”</p>
<p class="c015">They talked fast and laughed together. Erlend was
dressed in a short close-fitting brown jacket and had a
small red silk cap pulled down over his black hair—he
looked so young; he laughed and played with the child;
but sometimes he would take Kristin’s hand, and press it
till it hurt her.</p>
<p class="c015">He spoke of the rumours of war and was glad:
“’Twill be easier for me to win back the King’s friendship,”
said he, “and then will all things be easy,” he said
vehemently.</p>
<p class="c015">At last they sat down in a meadow up among the woods.
Erlend had the child on his lap; Kristin sat by his side;
under cover of the grass he played with her fingers. He
pressed into her hand three gold rings bound together by
a cord:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_157">157</span>“By and by,” he whispered, “you shall have as many as
will go on your fingers—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I shall wait for you here on this field each day about
this time, as long as you are at Skog,” he said as they
parted. “And you must come if you can.”</p>
<p class="c015">The next day Aasmund Björgulfsön set out with his wife
and children to the manor of Gyrid’s kin in Hadeland.
They had been scared by the talk of war; the folk about
Galo still went in terror since Duke Eirik’s harrying of
that countryside some years before. Aasmund’s old
mother was so fearful, she was minded to seek shelter in
Nonneseter—besides she was too weak to travel with the
others. So Kristin was to stay at Skog with the old woman—she
called her grandmother—till Aasmund came back
from Hadeland.</p>
<p class="c015">About the midday hour, when the folk on the farm
were resting, Kristin went to the loft-room where she slept.
She had brought some clothes with her in a sheepskin bag,
and now she changed her garments, humming to herself
the while.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father had given her a dress of thick cotton stuff
from the East, skyblue with a close pattern of red flowers;
this she put on. She brushed and combed out her hair and
bound it back from her face with a red silk ribbon, wound
a red silk belt tightly about her waist and put Erlend’s
rings upon her fingers; all the time she wondered if he
would think her fair.</p>
<p class="c015">The two dogs that had been with Erlend in the forest had
slept in the loft-room over night—she called them to go
with her now. She stole out round the houses and took
the same path as the day before up through the hill-pastures.</p>
<p class="c015">The field amid the forest lay lonely and silent in the
burning midday sun; the pine woods that shut it in on all
sides gave out a hot strong scent. The sun stung, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_158">158</span>the blue sky seemed strangely near and close down upon
the tree-tops.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sat down in the shade in the borders of the
wood. She was not vexed that Erlend was not there; she
was sure he would come, and it gave her an odd gladness
to sit there alone a little and to be the first.</p>
<p class="c015">She listened to the low hum of tiny life above the yellow,
scorched grass, pulled a few dry, spicy-scented flowers
that she could reach without moving more than her hand,
and rolled them between her fingers and smelt them—she
sat with wide open eyes sunk in a kind of drowse.</p>
<p class="c015">She did not move when she heard a horse in the woods.
The dogs growled and the hair on their necks bristled—then
they bounded up over the meadow, barking and wagging
their tails. Erlend sprang from his horse at the edge
of the forest, let it go with a clap on its flank and ran
down towards her with the dogs jumping about him. He
caught their muzzles in his hands and came to her leading
the two elk-grey, wolflike beasts. Kristin smiled and held
out her hand without getting up.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Once, while she was looking at the dark head that lay
in her lap, between her hands, something bygone flashed
on her mind. It stood out, clear yet distant, as a homestead
far away on a mountain slope may start to sight of
a sudden from out dark clouds, when a sunbeam strikes
it on a stormy day. And it was as though there welled
up in her heart all the tenderness Arne Gyrdsön had once
begged for while as yet she did not understand his words.
With timid passion, she drew the man up to her and laid
his head upon her breast, kissing him as if afraid he should
be taken from her. And when she saw his head upon her
arm, she felt as though she clasped a child—she hid his
eyes with one of her hands and showered little kisses upon
his mouth and cheek.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_159">159</span>The sunshine had gone from the meadow—the leaden
colour above the tree-tops had thickened to dark-blue and
spread over the whole sky; little, coppery flashes like fire-tinged
smoke flickered within the clouds. Bayard came
down to them, neighed loudly once and then stood stock
still, staring before him. Soon after came the first flash
of lightning, and the thunder followed close, not far away.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend got up and took hold of the horse. An old barn
stood at the lowest end of the meadow; they went thither,
and he tied Bayard to some woodwork just inside the door.
At the back of the barn lay some hay; Erlend spread his
cloak out, and they seated themselves with the dogs at
their feet.</p>
<p class="c015">And now the rain came down like a sheet before the
doorway. It hissed in the trees and lashed the ground—soon
they had to move further in, away from the drips
from the roof. Each time it lightened and thundered,
Erlend whispered:</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you not afraid, Kristin—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“A little—” she whispered back and drew closer to
him.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They knew not how long they had sat—the storm had
soon passed over—it thundered far away, but the sun
shone on the wet grass outside the door, and the sparkling
drops fell more and more rarely from the roof. The
sweet smell of the hay in the barn grew stronger.</p>
<p class="c015">“Now must I go,” said Kristin, and Erlend answered:
“Aye, ’tis like you must.” He took her foot in his hand:
“You will be wet—you must ride and I must walk—out of
the woods—” and he looked at her so strangely.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin shook—it must be because her heart beat so,
she thought—her hands were cold and clammy. As he
kissed her vehemently she weakly tried to push him from
her. Erlend lifted his face a moment—she thought of a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_160">160</span>man who had been given food at the convent one day—he
had kissed the bread they gave him. She sank back
upon the hay....</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">She sat upright when Erlend lifted his head from her
arms. He raised himself suddenly upon his elbow:</p>
<p class="c015">“Look not so—Kristin!”</p>
<p class="c015">His voice sent a new, wild pang into Kristin’s soul—he
was not glad—<i>he</i> was unhappy too—!</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin, Kristin—</p>
<p class="c015">“—Think you I lured you out here to me in the woods
meaning this—to make you mine by force—” he asked in
a little.</p>
<p class="c015">She stroked his hair and did not look at him:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas not force, I trow—you had let me go as I came,
had I begged you—” said she in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not,” he answered and hid his face in her lap—</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you that I would betray you?” asked he, vehemently.
“Kristin—I swear to you by my Christian
faith—may God forsake me in my last hour, if I keep not
faith with you till the day of my death—”</p>
<p class="c015">She could say naught, she only stroked his hair again
and again.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis time I went home, is it not?” she asked at length,
and she seemed to wait in deadly terror for his answer.</p>
<p class="c015">“May be so,” he answered dully. He got up quickly,
went to the horse, and began to loosen the reins.</p>
<p class="c015">Then she too got up. Slowly, wearily and with crushing
pain it came home to her—she knew not what she had
hoped he might do—set her upon his horse, maybe, and
carry her off with him so she might be spared from
going back amongst other people. It was as though her
whole body ached with wonder—that this ill thing was
what was sung in all the songs. And since Erlend had
wrought her this, she felt herself grown so wholly his, she
knew not how she should live away from him any more.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_161">161</span>She was to go from him now, but she could not understand
that it should be so—</p>
<p class="c015">Down through the woods he went on foot, leading the
horse. He held her hand in his, but they found no words
to say.</p>
<p class="c015">When they had come so far that they could see the
houses at Skog, he bade her farewell.</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin—be not so sorrowful—the day will come or
ever you know it, when you will be my wedded wife—”</p>
<p class="c015">But her heart sank as he spoke:</p>
<p class="c015">“Must you go away, then—?” she asked, dismayed.</p>
<p class="c015">“As soon as you are gone from Skog,” said he, and his
voice already rang more bright. “If there be no war, I
will speak to Munan—he has long urged me that I should
wed—he will go with me and speak for me to your father.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin bent her head—at each word he said, she felt
the time that lay before grow longer and more hard to
think of—the convent, Jörundgaard—she seemed to float
upon a stream which bore her far from it all.</p>
<p class="c015">“Sleep you alone in the loft-room, now your kinsfolk
are gone?” asked Erlend. “Then will I come and speak
with you to-night—will you let me in?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Kristin low. And so they parted.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The rest of the day she sat with her father’s mother, and
after supper she took the old lady to her bed. Then she
went up to the loft-room, where she was to lie. There
was a little window in the room; Kristin sat herself down
on the chest that stood below it—she had no mind to go
to bed.</p>
<p class="c015">She had long to wait. It was quite dark without when
she heard the soft steps upon the balcony. He knocked
upon the door with his cloak about his knuckles, and
Kristin got up, drew the bolt and let Erlend in.</p>
<p class="c015">She marked how glad he was, when she flung her arms
about his neck and clung to him.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_162">162</span>“I have been fearing you would be angry with me,” he
said.</p>
<p class="c015">“You must not grieve for our sin,” he said sometime
after. “’Tis not a deadly sin. God’s law is not like to
the law of the land in this—Gunnulv, my brother, once
made this matter plain to me—if two vow to have and
hold each other fast for all time, and thereafter lie together,
then they are wedded before God and may not
break their troths without great sin. I can give you the
words in Latin when they come to my mind—I knew them
once....”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin wondered a little why Erlend’s brother should
have said this—but she thrust from her the hateful fear
that it might have been said of Erlend and another—and
sought to find comfort in his words.</p>
<p class="c015">They sat together on the chest, he with his arm about
her, and now Kristin felt that ’twas well with her once
more and she was safe—beside him was the only spot now
where she could feel safe and sheltered.</p>
<p class="c015">At times Erlend spoke much and cheerfully—then he
would be silent for long while he sat caressing her. Without
knowing it Kristin gathered up out of all he said each
little thing that could make him fairer and dearer to her,
and lessen his blame in all she knew of him that was not
good.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend’s father, Sir Nikulaus, had been so old before he
had children, he had not patience enough nor strength
enough left to rear them up himself; both the sons had
grown up in the house of Sir Baard Petersön at Hestnæs.
Erlend had no sisters and no brother save Gunnulv; he
was one year younger and was a priest at Christ’s Church
in Nidaros. “He is dearest to me of all mankind save
only you.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin asked if Gunnulv were like him, but Erlend
laughed and said they were much unlike both in mind and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_163">163</span>body. Now Gunnulv was in foreign lands studying—he
had been away these three years, but had sent letters home
twice, the last a year ago, when he thought to go from St.
Geneviève’s in Paris and make his way to Rome. “He
will be glad, Gunnulv, when he comes home and finds me
wed,” said Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">Then he spoke of the great heritage he had had from his
father and mother—Kristin saw he scarce knew himself
how things stood with him now. She knew somewhat of
her father’s dealings in land—Erlend had dealt in his the
other way about, sold and scattered and wasted and
pawned, worst of all in the last years when he had been
striving to free him of his paramour, thinking that, this
done, his sinful life might in time be forgotten and his
kin stand by him once more; he had thought he might
some day come to be Warden of half the Orkdöla county,
as his father had been before him.</p>
<p class="c015">“But now do I scarce know what the end will be,” said
he. “Maybe I shall sit at last on a mountain croft like
Björn Gunnarsön, and bear out the dung on my back as
did the thralls of old, because I have no horse.”</p>
<p class="c015">“God help you,” said Kristin, laughing. “Then I must
come to you for sure—I trow I know more of farm work
and country ways than you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I can scarce think you have borne out the dung-basket,”
said he, laughing too.</p>
<p class="c015">“No; but I have seen how they spread the dung out—and
sown corn have I, well nigh every year at home.
’Twas my father’s wont to plough himself the fields nearest
the farm, and he let me sow the first piece that I might
bring good fortune—” the thought sent a pang through
her heart, so she said quickly: “—and a woman you must
have to bake, and brew the small beer, and wash your one
shirt, and milk—and you must hire a cow or two from
the rich farmer near by—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_164">164</span>“Oh, God be thanked that I hear you laugh a little once
more!” said Erlend and caught her up so that she lay on
his arms like a child.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Each of the six nights which passed ere Aasmund Björgulfsön
came home, Erlend was in the loft-room with
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">The last night he seemed as unhappy as she; he said
many times they must not be parted from one another a
day longer than needful. At last he said very low:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now should things go so ill that I cannot come back
hither to Oslo before winter—and if it so falls out you
need help of friends—fear not to turn to Sira Jon here
at Gerdarud, we are friends from childhood up, and Munan
Baardsön, too, you may safely trust.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin could only nod. She knew he spoke of what she
had thought on each single day; but Erlend said no more
of it. So she too said naught, and would not show how
heavy of heart she was.</p>
<p class="c015">On the other nights he had gone from her when the
night grew late, but this last evening he begged hard that
he might lie and sleep by her an hour. Kristin was fearful,
but Erlend said haughtily: “Be sure that were I
found here in your bower, I am well able to answer for
myself—” She herself, too, was fain to keep him by her
yet a little while, and she had not strength enough to deny
him aught.</p>
<p class="c015">But she feared that they might sleep too long. So most
of the night she sat leaning against the head of the bed,
dozing a little at times, and scarce knowing herself when he
caressed her and when she only dreamed it. Her one
hand she held upon his breast, where she could feel the
beating of his heart beneath, and her face was turned to
the window that she might see the dawn without.</p>
<p class="c015">At length she had to wake him. She threw on some
clothes and went out with him upon the balcony—he clambered
<span class="pageno" id="Page_165">165</span>over the railing on the side that faced on to another
house near by. Now he was gone from her sight—the
corner hid him. Kristin went in again and crept
into her bed; and now she quite gave way and fell to
weeping for the first time since Erlend had made her
all his own.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">5</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">AT Nonneseter the days went by as before. Kristin’s
time was passed between the dormitory and the church,
the weaving-room, the book-hall and the refectory.
The nuns and the convent folk gathered in the pot-herbs
and the fruits from the herb-garden and the orchard;
Holy Cross Day came in the autumn with the procession,
then there was the fast before Michaelmas—Kristin
wondered—none seemed to mark any change in
her. But she had ever been quiet when amongst strangers,
and Ingebjörg Filippusdatter, who was by her night and
day, was well able to chatter for them both.</p>
<p class="c015">Thus no one marked that her thoughts were far away
from all around her. Erlend’s paramour—she said to herself,
she was Erlend’s paramour now. It seemed now as
though she had dreamed it all—the eve of St. Margaret’s
Mass, that hour in the barn, the nights in her bower
at Skog—either she had dreamed it, or else all about her
now was a dream. But one day she must waken, one day
it must all come out. Not for a moment did she think
aught else than that she bore Erlend’s child within her—</p>
<p class="c015">But what would happen to her when this came to light
she could not well think. Would she be put into
the black hole, or be sent home—She saw dim pictures
of her father and mother far away—Then she shut
her eyes, dizzy and sick, bowed in fancy beneath the coming
<span class="pageno" id="Page_166">166</span>storm and tried to harden herself to bear it since she
thought it must end by sweeping her for ever into Erlend’s
arms—the only place where now she felt she had a home.</p>
<p class="c015">Thus was there in this strained waiting as much of hope
as terror, as much of sweetness as of torment. She was
unhappy—but she felt her love for Erlend as it were a
flower planted within her—and, spite of her unhappiness,
it put forth fresher and richer blooms each day. That
last night when he had slept by her side she had felt, as a
faint and fleeting bliss, that there awaited her a joy and
happiness in his arms such as she had not yet known—she
thrilled now at the thought of it; it came to her like
warm, spicy breaths from sun-heated gardens. Wayside
brat—Inga had flung the word at her—she opened her
arms to it and pressed it to her bosom. Wayside brat,
was the name they gave to the child begotten in secret
in woods or fields. She felt the sunshine and the smell
of the pines in the forest pasture. Each new, creeping
tremor, each sudden pulse-beat in her body she took as a
reminder from the unborn babe that now she was come
out into new paths—and were they never so hard to follow
to the end, she was sure they must lead to Erlend at
the last.</p>
<p class="c015">She sat betwixt Ingebjörg and Sister Astrid and sewed at
the great tapestry of knights and birds amidst leafy tendrils.
And as she sewed she thought of how she should
fly when the time was come and it could no longer be
hidden. She saw herself walking along the highways,
clothed like a poor woman; all she owned of gold and
silver she bore within a bundle in her hand. She bought
herself shelter on a farm somewhere in a far away countryside—she
went as a serving-wench, bore the water-carrier’s
yoke upon her neck, worked in the byres, baked and
washed and was cursed because she would not tell who
was the child’s father. Then Erlend came and found
her—</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_167">167</span>Sometimes she dreamed that he came too late. She lay
snow-white and fair in the poor peasant’s bed. Erlend
stooped as he came in at the door; he had on the long
black cloak he had used to wear when he came to her by
night at Skog. The woman led him forward to where
she lay, he sank down and took her cold hands, his eyes
were sad as death—dost thou lie here, my one delight—?
Bent with sorrow he went out with his tender son clasped
to his breast, in the folds of his cloak—nay, she thought
not in good sooth that it would so fall out; she had no
mind to die, Erlend should have no such sorrow—But
her heart was so heavy, it did her good to dream these
dreams—</p>
<p class="c015">Then for a moment it stood out cold and clear as ice
before her—the child, that was no dream, that must be
faced; she must answer one day for what she had done—and
it seemed as if her heart stood still with terror.</p>
<p class="c015">But after a little time had gone by, she came to think
’twas not so sure after all she was with child. She understood
not herself why she was not glad—it was as though
she had lain and wept beneath a warm covering and now
must get up in the cold. A month went by—then two;
now she was sure that she had been spared this ill-hap—and,
empty and chill of soul, she felt yet unhappier
than before. In her heart there dawned a little bitterness
toward Erlend. Advent drew near, and she
had heard neither from or of him; she knew not where he
was.</p>
<p class="c015">And now she felt she could not bear this fear and doubt—it
was as though a bond betwixt them had snapped;
now she was afraid indeed—might it not so befall that she
should never see him more? All she had been safely
linked to once, she was parted from now—and the new
tie that bound her to her lover was such a frail one. She
never thought that he would mean to play her false—but
there was so much that might happen—She knew not
<span class="pageno" id="Page_168">168</span>how she could go on any longer day after day, suffering
the tormenting doubt of this time of waiting.</p>
<p class="c015">Now and then she thought of her father and mother and
sisters—she longed for them, but as for something she
had lost for ever.</p>
<p class="c015">And sometimes in church, and elsewhere too, she would
feel a great yearning to take part in all that this meant,
the communion of mankind with God. It had ever been
a part of her life; now she stood outside with her unconfessed
sin.</p>
<p class="c015">She told herself that this cutting adrift from home and
kin and church was but for a time. Erlend must take her
by the hand and lead her back into it all. When her
father had given consent to their love, she could go to
him as of yore; when she and Erlend were wed, they
could confess and do penance for their transgression.</p>
<p class="c015">She began to seek for tokens that other folk were not
without sin any more than they. She hearkened more to
tale-bearing, and marked all the little things about her
which showed that not even the Sisters in the convent here
were altogether godly and unworldly. These were only
little things—under Lady Groa’s rule Nonneseter to the
world was a pattern of what a godly sisterhood should be.
Zealous in their devotions, diligent, full of care for the
poor and sick, were the nuns. Their aloofness from the
world was not so strict but that the Sisters both had visits
from their friends and kin in the parlour, and themselves
were given leave to visit these in the town when aught was
afoot; but no nun had brought shame upon the house by
her life all the years of Lady Groa’s rule.</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin had now an ear alive to all the little jars
within the convent walls—little wranglings and spites and
vanities. Save in the nursing of the sick, none of the Sisters
would help with the rough housework—all were
minded to be women of learning or skilled in some craft;
the one strove to outdo the other, and the Sisters who had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_169">169</span>no turn for learning or the nobler crafts, lost heart and
mooned through the hours as though but half awake.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Groa herself was wise as well as learned; she kept
a wakeful eye on her spiritual daughters’ way of life and
their diligence, but she troubled herself little about their
souls’ health. She had been kind and friendly to Kristin
at all times—she seemed to like her better than the other
young girls, but that was because Kristin was apt at books
and needlework, diligent and sparing of words. Lady
Groa never looked for an answer from any of the Sisters;
but on the other hand she was ever glad to speak with
men. They came and went in her parlour—tenant farmers
and bailiffs of the convent, Preaching Friars from the
Bishop, stewards of estates on Hovedö with whom she was
at law. She had her hands full with the oversight of the
convent’s great estates, with the keeping of accounts, sending
out church vestments and taking in books to be copied
and sending them away again. Not the most evil-minded
of men could find aught unseemly in Lady Groa’s way
of life. But she liked only to talk of such things as women
seldom know about.</p>
<p class="c015">The prior, who dwelt in a house by himself northward
of the church, seemed to have no more will of his own
than the Abbess’ writing reed or her scourge. Sister Potentia
looked after most things within the house; and she
thought most of keeping such order as she had seen in the
far-famed German convent where she had passed her noviciate.
She had been called Sigrid Ragnvaldsdatter before,
but had taken a new name when she took the habit
of the order, for this was much the use in other lands;
it was she too who had thought of making the maidens,
who were at Nonneseter as pupils and for a time only,
wear novice’s dress.</p>
<p class="c015">Sister Cecilia Baardsdatter was not as the other nuns.
She went about quietly, with downcast eyes, answered
always gently and humbly, was serving maid to all, did
<span class="pageno" id="Page_170">170</span>for choice all the roughest work, fasted much more than
she need—as much as Lady Groa would let her—and
knelt by the hour in the church after evensong or went
thither before matins.</p>
<p class="c015">But one evening, after she had been all day at the beck
with two lay sisters washing clothes, she suddenly burst
into a loud sobbing at the supper table. She cast herself
upon the stone floor, crept among the Sisters on hands
and knees, beat her breast, and with burning cheeks and
streaming tears begged them all to forgive her. She was
the worst sinner of them all—she had been hard as stone
with pride all her days; pride, and not meekness or thankfulness
for Jesus’ redeeming death, had held her up, when
she had been tempted in the world; she had fled thither
not because she loved a man’s soul, but because she loved
her own vain glory. She had served her sisters out of
pride, vanity had she drunken from her water cup, self-righteousness
had she spread thick upon her dry bread,
while the other Sisters were drinking their beer and eating
their bread-slices with butter.</p>
<p class="c015">Of all this Kristin understood no more than that not
even Cecilia Baardsdatter was truly godly at heart. An
unlit tallow candle that has hung from the roof and grown
foul with soot and cobweb—to this she herself likened
her unloving chastity.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Groa went herself and lifted up the sobbing
woman. Sternly she said, that for this disorder Cecilia
should as a punishment move from the Sisters’ dormitory
into the Abbess’s own bed, and lie there till she was free
of this fever.</p>
<p class="c015">“And thereafter, Sister Cecilia, shall you sit in my seat
for the space of a week; we will seek counsel of you in
spiritual things and give you such honour for your godly
life, that you may have your fill of the homage of sinful
mankind. Thus may you judge if it be worth so much
striving, and thereafter choose whether you will live by
<span class="pageno" id="Page_171">171</span>the rules, as do we others, or keep on in exercises that
no one demands of you. Then can you ponder whether
you will do for love of God, that he may look down upon
you in His mercy, all those things which you say you have
done that we should look up to you.”</p>
<p class="c015">And so was it done. Sister Cecilia lay in the Abbess’s
room for fourteen days; she had a high fever, and Lady
Groa herself tended her. When she got up again, she
had to sit for a week at the side of the Abbess in the
high seat both in the church and in the convent, and all
waited on her—she wept all the time as though she were
being beaten with whips. But afterward she was much
calmer and happier. She lived much as before, but she
blushed like a bride if anyone looked at her, whether she
was sweeping the floor or going alone to the church.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">None the less did this matter of Sister Cecilia awake in
Kristin a great longing for peace and atonement with all
wherefrom she had come to feel herself cast out. She
thought of Brother Edwin, and one day she took courage
and begged leave of Lady Groa to go out to the barefoot
friars and visit a friend she knew there.</p>
<p class="c015">She marked that Lady Groa misliked this—there was
scant friendship between the Minorites and the other cloisters
in the bishopric. And the Abbess was no better
pleased when she heard who was Kristin’s friend. She
said this Brother Edwin was an unstable man of God—he
was ever wandering about the country and seeking leave
to pay begging visits to strange bishoprics. The common
folk in many places held him to be a holy man, but he
did not seem to understand that a Franciscan’s first
duty was obedience to those set over him. He had
shriven freebooters and outlaws, baptised their children,
chanted them to their graves without asking leave—yet,
doubtless, he had sinned as much through ignorance as
in despite, and he had borne meekly the penances laid
<span class="pageno" id="Page_172">172</span>upon him on account of these things. He was borne with
too because he was skilled in his handicraft—but even
in working at this, he had fallen out with his craft-fellows;
the master-limners of the Bishop of Bergen would
not suffer him to come and work in the bishopric there.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin made bold to ask where he had come from,
this monk with the un-Norse name. Lady Groa was in
the mood for talking; she told how he had been born
here in Oslo, but his father was an Englishman, Rikard
Platemaster, who had wedded a farmer’s daughter from
the Skogheim Hundred, and had taken up his abode in
the town—two of Edwin’s brothers were armourers of
good repute in Oslo. But this eldest of the Platemaster’s
sons had been a restless spirit all his days. ’Twas true
he had felt a call to the life of the cloister from childhood
up; he had joined the Cistercians at Hovedö as
soon as he was old enough. They sent him to a monastery
in France to be trained—for his gifts were good;
while still there he had managed to get leave to pass
from the Cistercian into the Minorite order. And at the
time the unruly friars began building their church eastward
in the fields in despite of the Bishop’s command,
Brother Edwin had been one of the worst and most stiff-necked
of them all—nay, he had half killed with his hammer
one of the men the Bishop sent to stop the work.</p>
<p class="c015">—It was a long time now since anyone had spoken so
much with Kristin at one time, so when Lady Groa said
that now she might go, the young girl bent and kissed
the Abbess’s hand, fervently and reverently; and as she
did so, tears came into her eyes. And Lady Groa, who
saw she was weeping, thought it was from sorrow—and
so she said maybe she might after all let her go out one
day to see Brother Edwin.</p>
<p class="c015">And a few days later she was told some of the convent
folk had an errand to the King’s palace, and they could
<span class="pageno" id="Page_173">173</span>take her out along with them to the Brothers in the fields.</p>
<p class="c015">Brother Edwin was at home. Kristin had not thought
she could have been so glad to see anyone, except it had
been Erlend. The old man sat and stroked her hand
while they talked together—in thanks for her coming.
No, he had not been in her part of the country since the
night he lay at Jörundgaard, but he had heard she was to
wed and he wished her all good fortune. Then Kristin
begged that he would go over to the church with her.</p>
<p class="c015">They had to go out of the monastery and round to the
main door; Brother Edwin durst not take her through
the courtyard. He seemed altogether exceeding downcast,
and fearful of doing aught that might offend. He
had grown very old, thought Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">And when she had laid upon the altar her offering for
the officiant monk who was in the church, and afterward
asked Edwin if he would confess her, he grew very
frightened. He dared not, he said, he had been strictly
forbidden to hear confession.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, maybe you have heard of it,” said he. “So it
was that I felt I could not deny to those poor unfortunates
the gifts which God had given me of his free grace. But,
’tis true, I should have enjoined on them to seek forgiveness
in the right place—aye, aye—And you, Kristin,—you
are in duty bound to confess to your own prior.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, but this is a thing I cannot confess to the prior
of the convent,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you it can profit you aught to confess to me
what you would hide from your true father confessor,”
said the monk more severely.</p>
<p class="c015">“If so be you cannot confess me,” said Kristin, “at
least you can let me speak with you and ask your counsel
about what lies upon my soul.”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk looked about him. The church was empty
at the moment. Then he sat himself down on a chest
<span class="pageno" id="Page_174">174</span>which stood in a corner: “You must remember that I
cannot absolve you, but I will counsel you, and keep
silence as though you had told me in confession.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood up before him and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“It is this: I cannot be Simon Darre’s wife.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Therein you know well that I can counsel no otherwise
than would your own prior,” said Brother Edwin.
“To undutiful children God gives no happiness, and your
father had looked only to your welfare—that you know
full well.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not what your counsel will be, when you have
heard me to the end,” answered Kristin. “Thus stands
it now with us: Simon is too good to gnaw the bare
branch from which another man has broken the blossom.”</p>
<p class="c015">She looked the monk straight in the face. But when
she met his eyes and marked how the dry, wrinkled, old
face changed, grew full of sorrow and dismay—something
seemed to snap within her, tears, started to her eyes,
and she would have cast herself upon her knees. But
Edwin stopped her hurriedly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, nay, sit here upon the chest by me—confess you
I cannot—” He drew aside and made room for her.</p>
<p class="c015">She went on weeping; he stroked her hand, and said
gently:</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you that morning, Kristin, I first saw you there
on the stairway in the Hamar church—? I heard a tale
once, when I was in foreign lands, of a monk, who could
not believe that God loved all us wretched sinners—Then
came an angel and touched his eyes, and he beheld
a stone in the bottom of the sea, and under the stone
there lived a blind, white, naked creature; and he gazed
at it until he came to love it, for it was so frail and
weak. When I saw you sitting there, so little and so
frail, within the great stone house, methought it was but
reason that God should love such as you. Fair and pure
<span class="pageno" id="Page_175">175</span>you were, and, yet did you need a helper and a protector.
Methought I saw the whole church, with you
in it, lying in the hollow of God’s hand.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin said low:</p>
<p class="c015">“We have bound ourselves one to the other with the
dearest oaths—and I have heard that in the eyes of God
such a pact hallows our coming together as much as if our
fathers and mothers had given us one to the other.”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk answered sadly:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see well, Kristin, someone who knew it not to the full
has spoken to you of the canonical law. You could not
bind yourself by oath to this man without sinning against
your father and mother; them had God set over you before
you met him. And is it not sorrow and a shame for his
kin too, if they learn that he has lured astray the daughter
of a man who has borne his shield with honour at all seasons—betrothed,
too, to another? I hear by your words,
you deem you have not sinned so greatly—yet dare you not
confess this thing to your appointed priest. And if so be
you think you are as good as wed to this man, wherefore set
you not on your head the linen coif of wedlock, but go
still with flowing hair amidst the young maids with whom
you can have no great fellowship any more—for now must
the chief of your thoughts be with other things than they
have in mind?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not what they have in their minds,” said
Kristin, wearily. “True it is that all my thoughts are with
the man I long for. Were it not for my father and mother,
I would full gladly bind up my hair this day—little would
I care if I were called wanton, if only I might be called
his.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Know you if this man means so to deal toward you,
that you may be called his with honour some day,” asked
Brother Edwin.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Kristin told of all that had passed between Erlend
<span class="pageno" id="Page_176">176</span>Nikulaussön and herself. And while she spoke she seemed
not even to call to mind that she had ever doubted the outcome
of it all.</p>
<p class="c015">“See you not, Brother Edwin,” she began again, “we
could not help ourselves. God help me, if I were to meet
him without here, when I go from you, and should he pray
me to go with him, I would go—I wot well, too, I have
seen now there be other folk who have sinned as well as
we—When I was a girl at home ’twas past my understanding
how aught could win such power over the souls
of men that they could forget the fear of sin; but so much
have I learnt now: if the wrongs men do through lust and
anger cannot be atoned for, then must heaven be an empty
place—They tell of you, even, that you, too, once struck
a man in wrath—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis true,” said the monk, “God’s mercy alone have
I to thank that I am not called manslayer. ’Tis many
years agone—I was a young man then, and methought I
could not endure the wrong the Bishop would have put
upon us poor friars. King Haakon—he was Duke then—had
given us the ground for our house, but we were so poor
we had to work upon our church ourselves—with some
few workmen who gave their help more for Heavenly
reward than for what we could pay them. Maybe ’twas
sinful pride in us beggar monks to wish to build our church
so fair and goodly—but we were happy as children in the
fields, and sang songs of praise while we hewed and built
and toiled. Brother Ranulv—God rest his soul—was
masterbuilder—he was a right skilful stonecutter; nay, I
trow the man had been granted skill in all knowledge and
all arts by God himself. I was a carver of stone panels
in those days; I had but just finished one of St. Clara,
whom the angels were bearing to the church of St. Francis
in the dawn of Christmas day—a most fair panel it had
proved, and all of us joyed in it greatly—then the hellish
<span class="pageno" id="Page_177">177</span>miscreants tore down the walls, and a stone fell and
crushed my panels—I struck at a man with my hammer,
I could not contain me—</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, now you smile, my Kristin. But see you not, that
’tis not well with you now, since you would rather hear
such tales of other folks’ frailties than of the life and
deeds of good men, who might serve you as a pattern—?</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis no easy matter to give you counsel,” he said, when
it was time for her to go. “For were you to do what were
most right, you would bring sorrow to your father and
mother and shame to all your kin. But you must see to
it that you free yourself from the troth you plighted to
Simon Andressön—and then must you wait in patience for
the lot God may send you, make in your heart what amends
you can—and let not this Erlend tempt you to sin again,
but pray him lovingly to seek atonement with your kin
and with God—</p>
<p class="c015">“From your sin I cannot free you,” said Brother Edwin,
as they parted, “but pray for you, I will with all my
might....”</p>
<p class="c015">He laid his thin, old hands upon her head and prayed,
in farewell, that God might bless her and give her
peace.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">6</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">AFTERWARDS, there was much in what Brother Edwin had
said to her that Kristin could not call to mind. But she left
him with a mind strangely clear and peaceful.</p>
<p class="c015">Hitherto she had striven with a dull, secret fear and
tried to brave it out; telling herself she had not sinned
so deeply. Now she felt Edwin had shown her plainly
and clearly, that she had sinned indeed; such and such
was her sin, and she must take it upon her and try to bear
it meekly and well. She strove to think of Erlend without
<span class="pageno" id="Page_178">178</span>impatience—either because he did not send word of
himself or because she must want his caresses. She would
only be faithful and full of love for him.</p>
<p class="c015">She thought of her father and mother, and vowed to
herself that she would requite them for all their love, once
they had got over the sorrow she must bring upon them by
breaking with the Dyfrin folk. And wellnigh most of all,
she thought of Brother Edwin’s words of how she must not
seek comfort in looking on others’ faults; she felt she grew
humble and kind, and now she saw at once how easy it was
for her to win folks’ friendship. Then was she comforted
by the thought that after all ’twas not so hard to come to a
good understanding with people—and so it seemed to
her it surely could not be so hard for her and Erlend
either.</p>
<p class="c015">Until the day she gave her word to Erlend, she had
always striven earnestly to do what was right and good—but
she had done all at the bidding of others. Now she
felt she had grown from maid to woman. ’Twas not only
by reason of the fervent secret caresses she had taken and
given, not only that she had passed from her father’s ward
and was now under Erlend’s will. For Edwin had laid
upon her the burden of answering for her own life, aye
and for Erlend’s too. And she was willing to bear it well
and bravely. Thus she went about among the nuns at
Yule-tide; and, throughout the goodly rites and the joy
and peace of the holy time, though she felt herself unworthy,
yet she took comfort in thinking that the time would
soon come when she could set herself right again.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">But the second day of the new year, Sir Andres Darre
with his wife and all five children came, all unlooked for,
to the convent. They were come to keep the last days of
Yule-tide with their friends and kindred in the town, and
they asked that Kristin might have leave to be with them
in their lodging for a short space.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_179">179</span>“For methought, my daughter,” said Lady Angerd, “you
would scarce be loth to see a few new faces for a time.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The Dyfrin folk dwelt in a goodly house that stood in
a dwelling place near the bishop’s palace—Sir Andres’
cousin owned it. There was a great hall where the
serving-folk slept, and a fine loft-room with a fireplace of
masonry and three good beds; in the one Sir Andres and
Lady Angerd slept with their youngest son, Gudmund,
who was yet a child; in another slept Kristin and their
two daughters, Astrid and Sigrid, and in the third Simon
and his eldest brother Gyrd Andressön.</p>
<p class="c015">All Sir Andres’ children were comely; Simon the least
so, yet he too was reckoned to be well-favoured. And
Kristin marked still more than when she was at Dyfrin the
year before, that both his father and mother and his four
brothers and sisters hearkened most to Simon and did all
he would have them. They all loved each other dearly,
but all agreed, without grudging or envy, in setting Simon
foremost amongst them.</p>
<p class="c015">Here these good folk lived a merry, carefree life.
They visited the churches and made their offerings every
day, came together with their friends and drank in their
company each evening, while the young folk had full leave
to play and dance. All showed Kristin the greatest kindness,
and none seemed to mark how little glad she was.</p>
<p class="c015">Of an evening, when the light had been put out in the
loft-room, and all had sought their beds, Simon was wont
to get up and go to where the maidens lay. He would sit a
while on the edge of the bed; his talk was mostly to his
sisters, but in the dark he would let his hand rest on Kristin’s
bosom—while she lay there hot with wrath.</p>
<p class="c015">Now that her sense of such things was keener, she understood
well that there were many things Simon was both too
proud and too shy to say to her, since he saw she had no
mind to such talk from him. And she felt strangely bitter
<span class="pageno" id="Page_180">180</span>and angry with him, for it seemed to her as though he
would fain be a better man than he who had made her
his own—even though Simon knew not there was such a
one.</p>
<p class="c015">But one night when they had been dancing at another
house, Astrid and Sigrid were left behind there to sleep
with a playmate. When, late at night, the Dyfrin folk had
gone to rest in their loft-room, Simon came to Kristin’s
bed and climbed up into it; he laid himself down above the
fur cover.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin pulled the coverlid up to her chin and crossed
her arms firmly upon her breast. In a little Simon tried
to put his hand upon her bosom. She felt the silken
broidery on his wristband, and knew he had not taken off
any of his clothes.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are just as bashful in the dark as in the light,
Kristin,” said Simon, laughing a little. “Surely you can
at least let me have one hand to hold,” he said, and Kristin
gave him the tips of her fingers.</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you not we should have somewhat to talk of,
when it so falls out that we can be alone a little while?”
said he; and Kristin thought, now was the time for her to
speak. So she answered: yes. But after that she could
not utter a word.</p>
<p class="c015">“May I come under the fur,” he begged again. “’Tis
cold in the room now—” And he slipped in between the
fur coverlid and the woollen blanket she had next her.
He bent one arm round the bed head, but so that he did
not touch her. Thus they lay a while.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are not over-easy to woo, i’ faith,” said Simon soon
after, with a resigned laugh. “Now I pledge you my word,
I will not so much as kiss you, if you would not I should.
But surely you can speak to me at least?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin wet her lips with the tip of her tongue, but
still she was silent.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, if you are not lying there trembling!” went on
<span class="pageno" id="Page_181">181</span>Simon. “Surely it cannot be that you have aught against
me, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">She felt she could not lie to Simon, so she said “No,”—but
nothing more.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon lay a while longer; he tried to get her into talk
with him. But at last he laughed again and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see well you think I should be content with hearing
that you have naught against me—for to-night—and be
glad to boot. ’Tis a parlous thing, so proud as you are—yet
one kiss must you give me; then will I go my way and
not plague you any more—”</p>
<p class="c015">He took the kiss, then sat up and put his feet to the
floor. Kristin thought, now must she say to him what
she had to say—but he was away already by his own bed,
and she heard him undress.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The day after Lady Angerd was not so friendly to
Kristin as was her wont. The girl saw that the Lady
must have heard somewhat the night before, and that she
deemed her son’s betrothed had not borne her toward him
as she held was fitting.</p>
<p class="c015">Late that afternoon Simon spoke of a friend’s horse he
was minded to take in barter for one of his own. He
asked Kristin if she would go with him to look at it.
She was nothing loth; and they went out into the town together.</p>
<p class="c015">The weather was fresh and fair. It had snowed a little
overnight, but now the sun was shining, and it was freezing
so that the snow crackled under their feet. Kristin
felt ’twas good to be out and walk in the cold air, and when
Simon brought out the horse to show her, she talked of it
with him gaily enough; she knew something of horses,
she had been so much with her father. And this was a
comely beast—a mouse-grey stallion with a black stripe
down the back and a clipped mane, well-shapen and lively,
but something small and slightly built.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_182">182</span>“He would scarce hold out under a full-armed man for
long,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Indeed, no; nor did I mean him for such a rider,”
said Simon.</p>
<p class="c015">He led the horse out into the home field behind the
house, made it trot and walk, mounted to try its paces and
would have Kristin ride it too. Thus they stayed together
a good while out on the snowy field.</p>
<p class="c015">At last, as Kristin stood giving the horse bread out of her
hand, while Simon leant with his arm over its back, he said
all at once:</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks, Kristin, you and my mother are none too
loving one with another.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have not meant to be unloving to your mother,” said
she, “but I find not much to say to Lady Angerd.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nor seems it you find much to say to me either,” said
Simon. “I would not force myself upon you, Kristin,
before the time comes—but things cannot go on as now,
when I can never come to speech with you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have never been one for much speaking”; said Kristin,
“I know it myself; and I look not you should think it
so great a loss, if what is betwixt us two should come to
naught.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You know well, what my thoughts are in that matter,”
said Simon, looking at her.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin flushed red as blood. And it gave her a pang
that she could not mislike the fashion of Simon Darre’s
wooing. After a while he said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it Arne Gyrdsön, Kristin, you feel you cannot forget?”
Kristin but gazed at him; Simon went on, and his
voice was gentle and kind: “Never would I blame you for
that—you had grown up like brother and sister, and scarce
a year is gone by. But be well assured, for your comfort,
that I have your good at heart—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s face had grown deathly white. Neither of
them spoke again as they went back through the town in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_183">183</span>the twilight. At the end of the street, in the blue-green
sky, rode the new moon’s sickle with a bright star within
its horn.</p>
<p class="c015">A year, thought Kristin; and she could not think when
she had last given a thought to Arne. She grew afraid—maybe
she was a wanton, wicked woman—but one year
since she had seen him on his bier in the wake room, and
had thought she should never be glad again in this life—she
moaned within herself for terror of her own heart’s
inconstancy and of the fleeting changefulness of all things.
Erlend, Erlend—could he forget her—and yet it seemed
to her ’twould be worse, if at any time she should forget
him.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Sir Andres went with his children to the great Yule-tide
feast at the King’s palace. Kristin saw all the pomp
and show of the festival—they came, too, into the hall
where sat King Haakon and the Lady Isabel Bruce, King
Eirik’s widow. Sir Andres went forward and did homage
to the King, while his children and Kristin stood somewhat
behind. She thought of all Lady Aashild had told
her; she called to mind that the King was near of kin to
Erlend, their fathers’ mothers were sisters—and she was
Erlend’s light o’ love, she had no right to stand here, least
of all amid these good and worthy folk, Sir Andres’
children.</p>
<p class="c015">Then all at once she saw Erlend Nikulaussön—he had
stepped forward in front of Queen Isabel, and stood with
bowed head and with his hand upon his breast, while she
spoke a few words to him; he had on the brown silk clothes
that he had worn at the guild feast. Kristin stepped
behind Sir Andres’ daughters.</p>
<p class="c015">When, some time after, Lady Angerd led her daughters
up before the Queen, Kristin could not see him anywhere,
but indeed she dared not lift her eyes from the floor. She
wondered whether he was standing somewhere in the hall,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_184">184</span>she thought she could feel his eyes upon her—but she
thought, too, that all folks looked at her as though they
must know she was a liar, standing there with the golden
garland on her outspread hair.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">He was not in the hall where the young folk were feasted
and where they danced when the tables had been taken
away; this evening it was Simon with whom Kristin must
dance.</p>
<p class="c015">Along one of the longer walls stood a fixed table, and
thither the King’s men bore ale and mead and wine the
whole night long. Once when Simon drew her thither and
drank to her, she saw Erlend standing near, behind Simon’s
back. He looked at her, and Kristin’s hand shook when
she took the beaker from Simon’s hand and set it to her
lips. Erlend whispered vehemently to the man who was
with him—a tall comely man, well on in years and somewhat
stout, who shook his head impatiently and looked as
he were vexed. Soon after Simon led her back to the
dance.</p>
<p class="c015">She knew not how long this dancing lasted—the music
seemed as though ’twould never end, and each moment was
long and evil to her with longing and unrest. At last
it was over, and Simon drew her to the drinking board
again.</p>
<p class="c015">A friend came forward to speak to him, and led him
away a few steps, to a group of young men. And Erlend
stood before her.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have so much I would fain say to you,” he whispered,
“I know not what to say first—in Jesus’ name, Kristin,
what ails you?” he asked quickly, for he saw her face grow
white as chalk.</p>
<p class="c015">She could not see him clearly; it seemed as though there
were running water between their two faces. He took a
goblet from the table, drank from it and handed it to her.
Kristin felt as though ’twas all too heavy for her, or as
<span class="pageno" id="Page_185">185</span>though her arm had been cut off at the shoulder; do as
she would, she could not lift the cup to her mouth.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it so, then, that you will drink with your betrothed,
but not with me?” asked Erlend softly—but Kristin
dropped the goblet from her hand and sank forward into
his arms.</p>
<p class="c015">When she awoke she was lying on a bench with her head
in a strange maiden’s lap—someone was standing by her
side, striking the palms of her hands, and she had water
on her face.</p>
<p class="c015">She sat up. Somewhere in the ring about her she saw
Erlend’s face, white and drawn. Her own body felt weak,
as though all her bones had melted away, and her head
seemed as it were large and hollow—but somewhere within
it shone one clear, desperate thought—she must speak
with Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">She said to Simon Darre—he stood near by:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas too hot for me, I trow,—so many tapers are
burning here—and I am little used to drink so much
wine—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you well again now,” asked Simon. “You frightened
folks—Mayhap you would have me take you home
now?”</p>
<p class="c015">“We must wait, surely, till your father and mother go,”
said Kristin calmly. “But sit down here—I can dance
no more.” She touched the cushion at her side—then she
held out her other hand to Erlend:</p>
<p class="c015">“Sit you here, Erlend Nikulaussön; I had no time to
speak my greetings to an end. ’Twas but of late Ingebjörg
said she deemed you had clean forgotten her.”</p>
<p class="c015">She saw it was far harder for him to keep calm than
for her—and it was all she could do to keep back the little
tender smile, which would gather round her lips.</p>
<p class="c015">“You must bear the maid my thanks for thinking of me
still,” he stammered. “Almost I was afraid she had forgotten
me.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_186">186</span>Kristin paused a little. She knew not what she should
say, which might seem to come from the flighty Ingebjörg
and yet might tell Erlend her meaning. Then there welled
up in her the bitterness of all these months of helpless
waiting, and she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Dear Erlend, can you think that we maidens could forget
the man who defended our honour so gallantly.”</p>
<p class="c015">She saw his face change as though she had struck him—and
at once she was sorry; then Simon asked what this
was they spoke of. Kristin told him of Ingebjörg’s and
her adventure in the Eikaberg woods. She marked that
Simon liked the tale but little. Then she begged him to
go and ask of Lady Angerd, whether they should not soon
go home; ’twas true that she was weary. When he was
gone, she looked at Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis strange,” said he in a low voice, “you are so
quick-witted—I had scarce believed it of you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you not I have had to learn to hide and be
secret?” said she gloomily.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend’s breath came heavily; he was still very pale.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis so then?” he whispered. “Yet did you promise
me to turn to my friends if this should come to pass.
God knows, I have thought of you each day, in dread that
the worst might have befallen—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know well what you mean by the worst,” said Kristin
shortly. “<i>That</i> you have no need to fear. To me what
seemed the worst was that you would not send me one
word of greeting—can you not understand that I am living
there amongst the nuns—like a stranger bird—?”
She stopped—for she felt that the tears were coming.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it therefore you are with the Dyfrin folk now?” he
asked. Then such grief came upon her that she could
make no answer.</p>
<p class="c015">She saw Lady Angerd and Simon come through the
doorway. Erlend’s hand lay upon his knee, near her, and
she could not take it—</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_187">187</span>“I must have speech with you,” said he eagerly, “we
have not said a word to one another we should have
said—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Come to mass in the Maria Church at Epiphany,”
said Kristin quickly, as she rose and went to meet the
others.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Angerd showed herself most loving and careful
of Kristin on the way home, and herself helped her to
bed. With Simon she had no talk until the day after.</p>
<p class="c015">Then he said:</p>
<p class="c015">“How comes it that you bear messages betwixt this
Erlend and Ingebjörg Filippusdatter? ’Tis not fit that
you should meddle in the matter, if there be hidden dealings
between them.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Most like there is naught in it,” said Kristin. “She
is but a chatterer.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks too,” said Simon, “you should have taken
warning by what’s past and not trusted yourself out in
the wild-wood paths alone with that magpie.” But Kristin
reminded him hotly that it was not their fault they had
strayed and lost themselves. Simon said no more.</p>
<p class="c015">The next day the Dyfrin folks took her back to the convent,
before they themselves left for home.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Erlend came to evensong in the convent church every
evening for a week without Kristin getting a chance to
change a word with him. She felt as she thought a hawk
must feel sitting chained to its perch with its hood over
its eyes. Every word that had passed between them at
their last meeting made her unhappy too—it should never
have been like that. It was of no use to say to herself:
it had come upon them so suddenly, they had hardly known
what they said.</p>
<p class="c015">But one afternoon in the twilight there came to the
parlour a comely woman, who looked like a townsman’s
wife. She asked for Kristin Lavransdatter, and said she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_188">188</span>was the wife of a mercer and her husband had come from
Denmark of late with some fine cloaks; Aasmund Björgulfsön
had a mind to give one to his brother’s daughter,
and the maid was to go with her and choose for herself.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was given leave to go with the woman. She
thought it was unlike her uncle to wish to give her a costly
gift, and strange that he should send an unknown woman
to fetch her. The woman was sparing of her words at
first, and said little in answer to Kristin’s questions, but
when they were come down to the town, she said of a
sudden:</p>
<p class="c015">“I will not play you false, fair child that you are—I
will tell you all this thing as it is, and you must do
as you deem best. ’Twas not your uncle who sent me,
but a man—maybe you can guess his name, and if you
cannot, then you shall not come with me. I have no husband—I
make a living for myself and mine by keeping
a house of call and selling beer; for such a one it boots
not to be too much afraid either of sin or of the watchmen—but
I will not lend my house for you to be betrayed
inside my doors.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood still, flushing red. She was strangely
sore and ashamed for Erlend’s sake. The woman said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I will go back with you to the convent, Kristin—but
you must give me somewhat for my trouble—the knight
promised me a great reward—but I too was fair once,
and I too was betrayed. And ’twould not be amiss if
you should name me in your prayers to-night—they call
me Brynhild Fluga.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin drew a ring off her finger and gave it to the
woman:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis fairly done of you, Brynhild—but if the man
be my kinsman Erlend Nikulaussön, then have I naught
to fear; he would have me to make peace betwixt him
and my uncle. You may set your mind at ease—but I
thank you none the less that you would have warned me.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_189">189</span>Brynhild Fluga turned away to hide a smile.</p>
<p class="c015">She led Kristin by the alleys behind St. Clement’s
Church northward towards the river. Here a few small
dwelling-places stood by themselves along the river-bank.
They went towards one of them along a path between
fences, and here Erlend came to meet them. He looked
about him, on all sides, then took off his cloak, wrapped
it about Kristin and pulled the hood over her face.</p>
<p class="c015">“What think you of this device,” he asked, quickly and
low. “Think you ’tis a great wrong I do?—yet needs
must I speak with you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“It boots but little now, I trow, to think what is right
and what is wrong,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Speak not so,” begged Erlend. “I bear the blame—Kristin,
every day and every night have I longed for you,”
he whispered close to her.</p>
<p class="c015">A shudder passed through her as she met his eyes for
a moment. She felt it as guilt in her, when he looked
so at her, that she had thought of anything but her love for
him.</p>
<p class="c015">Brynhild Fluga had gone on before. Erlend asked,
when they were come into the courtyard:</p>
<p class="c015">“Would you that we should go into the living-room, or
shall we talk up in the loft-room?”</p>
<p class="c015">“As you will,” answered Kristin; and they mounted
to the loft-room.</p>
<p class="c015">The moment he had barred the door behind them she
was in his arms—</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">She knew not how long she had lain folded thus in
his arms, when Erlend said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now must we say what has to be said, my Kristin—I
scarce dare let you stay here longer.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I dare stay here all night long if you would have
me stay,” she whispered.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend pressed his cheek to hers:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_190">190</span>“Then were I not your friend. ’Tis bad enough as
it is, but you shall not lose your good name for my sake.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin did not answer—but a soreness stirred within
her; how could he speak thus—he who had lured her
here to Brynhild Fluga’s house—she knew not why, but
she felt it was no honest place. And he had looked that
all should go as it had gone, of that she was sure.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have thought at times,” said Erlend again, “that if
there be no other way, I must bear you off by force—into
Sweden—Lady Ingebjörg welcomed me kindly in
the autumn and was mindful of our kinship. But now
do I suffer for my sins—I have fled the land before, as
you know—and I would not they should name you as
the like of that other.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Take me home with you to Husaby,” said Kristin low.
“I cannot bear to be parted from you, and to live on
among the maids at the convent. Both your kin and mine
would surely hearken to reason and let us come together
and be reconciled with them—”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend clasped her to him and groaned:</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot bring you to Husaby, Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Why can you not?” she asked softly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Eline came thither in the autumn,” said he after a
moment. “I cannot move her to leave the place,” he went
on hotly, “not unless I bear her to the sledge by force
and drive away with her. And that methought I could
not do—she has brought both our children home with
her—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin felt herself sinking, sinking. In a voice breaking
with fear, she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I deemed you were parted from her—”</p>
<p class="c015">“So deemed I too,” answered Erlend shortly. “But she
must have heard in Österdal, where she was, that I had
thoughts of marriage. You saw the man with me at the
Yule-tide feast—’twas my foster-father, Baard Petersön of
Hestnæs. I went to him when I came from Sweden, I
<span class="pageno" id="Page_191">191</span>went to my kinsman Heming Alvsön in Saltviken, too; I
talked with both about my wish to wed, and begged their
help. Eline must have come to hear of it—</p>
<p class="c015">“I bade her ask what she would for herself and the children—but
Sigurd, her husband—they look not that he
should live the winter out—and then none could deny us
if we would live together—</p>
<p class="c015">“—I lay in the stable with Haftor and Ulv, and Eline
lay in the hall in my bed. I trow my men had a rare
jest to laugh at behind my back—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin could not say a word. A little after, Erlend
spoke again:</p>
<p class="c015">“See you, the day we pledge each other at our espousals,
she must understand that all is over between her and me—she
has no power over me any more—</p>
<p class="c015">“But ’tis hard for the children. I had not seen them
for a year—they are fair children—and little can I do
to give them a happy lot.  ’Twould not have helped them
greatly had I been able to wed their mother.”</p>
<p class="c015">Tears began to roll down over Kristin’s cheeks. Then
Erlend said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Heard you what I said but now, that I had talked
with my kinsfolk? Aye, they were glad enough that I
was minded to wed. Then I said ’twas you I would have
and none other—”</p>
<p class="c015">“And they liked not that?” asked Kristin at length, forlornly.</p>
<p class="c015">“See you not?” said Erlend gloomily, “they could say
but one thing—they cannot and they will not ride with
me to your father, until this bargain twixt you and Simon
Andressön is undone again. It has made it none the
easier for us, Kristin, that you have spent your Yule-tide
with the Dyfrin folk.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin gave way altogether and wept noiselessly. She
had felt ever that there was something of wrong and dishonour
in her love, and now she knew the fault was hers.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_192">192</span>She shook with the cold when she got up soon after,
and Erlend wrapped her in both the cloaks. It was quite
dark now without, and Erlend went with her as far as
St. Clement’s Church; then Brynhild brought her the rest
of the way to Nonneseter.</p>
<h3 class="c013">7</h3>
<p class="c017">A week later Brynhild Fluga came with the word that
the cloak was ready, and Kristin went with her and met
Erlend in the loft-room as before.</p>
<p class="c015">When they parted, he gave her a cloak: “So that you
may have something to show in the convent,” said he.
It was of blue velvet with red silk inwoven, and Erlend
bade her mark that ’twas of the same hues as the dress
she had worn that day in the woods. Kristin wondered
it should make her so glad that he said this—she thought
he had never given her greater happiness than when he
had said these words.</p>
<p class="c015">But now they could no longer make use of this way of
meeting, and it was not easy to find a new one. But
Erlend came often to the vespers at the convent church,
and sometimes Kristin would make herself an errand
after the service up to the commoners’ houses; and
then they would snatch a few words together by
stealth up by the fences in the murk of the winter evening.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Kristin thought of asking leave of Sister Potentia
to visit some old, crippled women, alms-folk of the convent,
who dwelt in a cottage standing in one of the fields.
Behind the cottage was an outhouse where the women
kept a cow; Kristin offered to tend it for them; and while
she was there Erlend would join her and she would let
him in.</p>
<p class="c015">She wondered a little to mark that, glad as Erlend was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_193">193</span>to be with her, it seemed to rankle in his mind that she
could devise such a plan.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas no good day for you when you came to know
me,” said he one evening. “Now have you learnt to follow
the ways of deceit.”</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>You</i> ought not to blame me,” answered Kristin sadly.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not you I blame,” said Erlend quickly with a
shamed look.</p>
<p class="c015">“I had not thought myself,” went on Kristin, “that
’twould come so easy to me to lie. But one <i>can</i> do what
one <i>must</i> do.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, ’tis not so at all times,” said Erlend as before.
“Mind you not last winter, when you could not bring yourself
to tell your betrothed that you would not have him?”</p>
<p class="c015">To this Kristin answered naught, but only stroked his
face.</p>
<p class="c015">She never felt so strongly how dear Erlend was to her,
as when he said things like this that made her grieve or
wonder. She was glad when she could take upon herself
the blame for all that was shameful and wrong in their
love. Had she found courage to speak to Simon as she
should have done, they might have been a long way now
on the road to have all put in order. Erlend had done
all he could when he had spoken of their wedding to
his kinsmen. She said this to herself when the days in
the convent grew long and evil—Erlend had wished to
make all things right and good again. With little tender
smiles she thought of him as he drew a picture of their
wedding for her,—she should ride to church in silks and
velvet, she should be led to the bridal bed with the high
golden crown on her flowing hair—“your lovely, lovely
hair,” he said, drawing her plaits through his hand.</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet can it not be the same to you as though I had never
been yours,” said Kristin musingly, once when he talked
thus.</p>
<p class="c015">Then he clasped her to him wildly:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_194">194</span>“Can I call to mind the first time I drank in Yule-tide
think you, or the first time I saw the hills at home turn
green when winter was gone? Aye, well do I mind the
first time you were mine, and each time since—but to have
you for my own is like keeping Yule and hunting birds
on green hillsides for ever—”</p>
<p class="c015">Happily she nestled to him. Not that she ever thought
for a moment it would turn out as Erlend was so sure
it would—Kristin felt that before long a day of judgment
must come upon them. It could not be that things
should go well for them in the end.... But she was not
so much afraid—she was much more afraid Erlend might
have to go northward before it all came to light, and
she be left behind, parted from him. He was over at the
castle at Akersnes now; Munan Baardsön was posted there
while the bodyguard was at Tunsberg, where the King lay
grievously sick. But sometime Erlend must go home and
see to his possessions. That she was afraid of his going
home to Husaby because Eline sat there awaiting for him,
she would not own even to herself; and neither would she
own that she was less afraid to be taken in sin along
with Erlend than of standing forth alone and telling
Simon and her father what was in her heart.</p>
<p class="c015">Almost she could have wished for punishment to come
upon her, and that soon. For now she had no other
thought than of Erlend; she longed for him in the day
and dreamed of him at night; she could not feel remorse,
but she took comfort in thinking the day would come when
she would have to pay dear for all they had snatched by
stealth. And in the short evening hours she could be
with Erlend in the almswomen’s cow-shed, she threw herself
into his arms with as much passion as if she knew
she had paid with her soul already that she might be his.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">But time went on, and it seemed as though Erlend might
have the good fortune he had counted on. Kristin never
<span class="pageno" id="Page_195">195</span>marked that any in the convent mistrusted her. Ingebjörg,
indeed, had found out that she met Erlend, but
Kristin saw the other never dreamed ’twas aught else than
a little passing sport. That a maid of good kindred,
promised in marriage, should dare wish to break the bargain
her kinsfolk had made, such a thought would never
come to Ingebjörg, Kristin saw. And once more a pang of
terror shot through her—it might be ’twas a quite unheard
of thing, this she had taken in hand. And at this thought
she wished again that discovery might come, and all be
at an end.</p>
<p class="c015">Easter came. Kristin knew not how the winter had
gone; every day she had not seen Erlend had been long
as an evil year, and the long evil days had linked themselves
together into weeks without end—but now it was
spring and Easter was come, she felt ’twas no time since
the Yule-tide feast. She begged Erlend not to seek her
till the Holy Week was gone by; and he yielded to her
in this, as he did to all her wishes, thought Kristin. It
was as much her own blame as his that they had sinned
together in not keeping the Lenten fast. But Easter she
resolved they should keep. Yet it was misery not to see
him. Maybe he would have to go soon—he had said
naught of it, but she knew that now the King lay dying,
and mayhap this might bring some turn in Erlend’s fortunes,
she thought.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Thus things stood with her, when one of the first days
after Easter word was brought her to go down to the parlour
to her betrothed.</p>
<p class="c015">As soon as he came toward her and held out his hand,
she felt there was somewhat amiss—his face was not as
it was wont to be; his small, grey eyes did not laugh,
they did not smile when he smiled. And Kristin could
not help seeing it became him well to be a little less merry.
He looked well, too, in a kind of travelling dress—a long
<span class="pageno" id="Page_196">196</span>blue, close-fitting outer garment men called <i>kothardi</i>, and a
brown shoulder-cape with a hood, which was thrown back
now; the cold air had given his light-brown hair a yet
stronger curl.</p>
<p class="c015">They sat and talked for a while. Simon had been at
Formo through Lent, and had gone over to Jörundgaard
almost daily. They were well there; Ulvhild as well as
they dared look that she should be; Ramborg was at home
now, she was a fair child and lively.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twill be over one of these days—the year you were
to be here at Nonneseter,” said Simon. “By this the folks
at your home will have begun to make ready for our
betrothal feast—yours and mine.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin said naught, and Simon went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“I said to Lavrans, I would ride hither to Oslo and
speak to you of this.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked down and said low:</p>
<p class="c015">“I, too, would fain speak with you of that matter, Simon—alone.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I saw well myself that we must speak of it alone,”
answered Simon, “and I was about to ask even now that
you would pray Lady Groa to let us go together into the
garden for a little.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin rose quickly and slipped from the room without
a sound. Soon after she came back followed by one of
the nuns with a key.</p>
<p class="c015">There was a door leading from the parlour out into
an herb-garden that lay behind the most westerly of the
convent buildings. The nun unlocked the door and they
stepped out into a mist so thick they could see but a few
paces in among the trees. The nearest stems were coal-black;
the moisture stood in beads on every twig and
bough. A little fresh snow lay melting upon the wet
mould, but under the bushes some white and yellow lily
plants were blooming already, and a fresh, cool smell rose
from the violet leaves.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_197">197</span>Simon led her to the nearest bench. He sat a little bent
forward with his elbows resting upon his knees. Then he
looked up at her with a strange little smile:</p>
<p class="c015">“Almost I think I know what you would say to me,”
said he. “There is another man, who is more to you than
I—”</p>
<p class="c015">“It is so,” answered Kristin faintly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks I know his name too,” said Simon, in a
harder tone. “It is Erlend Nikulaussön of Husaby?”</p>
<p class="c015">After a while Kristin asked in a low voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“It has come to your ears then?”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon was a little slow in answering.</p>
<p class="c015">“You can scarce think I could be so dull as not to see
somewhat when we were together at Yule? I could say
naught then, for my father and mother were with us.
But this it is that has brought me hither alone this time.
I know not whether it be wise of me to touch upon it—but
methought we must talk of these things before we are
given to one another.</p>
<p class="c015">“But so it is now, that when I came hither yesterday—I
met my kinsman Master Öistein. And he spoke of
you. He said you two had passed across the churchyard
of St. Clement’s one evening, and with you was a woman
they call Brynhild Fluga. I swore a great oath that he
must have seen amiss! And if you say it is untrue, I shall
believe your word.”</p>
<p class="c015">“The priest saw aright,” answered Kristin defiantly.
“You foreswore yourself, Simon.”</p>
<p class="c015">He sat a little ere he asked:</p>
<p class="c015">“Know you who this Brynhild Fluga is, Kristin?” As
she shook her head, he said: “Munan Baardsön set her
up in a house here in the town, when he wedded—she
carries on unlawful dealings in wine—and other things—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You know her?” asked Kristin mockingly.</p>
<p class="c015">“I was never meant to be a monk or a priest,” said
Simon reddening. “But I can say at least that I have
<span class="pageno" id="Page_198">198</span>wronged no maid and no man’s wedded wife. See you
not yourself that ’tis no honourable man’s deed to bring
you out to go about at night in such company—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Erlend did not draw me on,” said Kristin, red with
anger, “nor has he promised me aught. I set my heart
on him without his doing aught to tempt me—from the
first time I saw him, he was dearer to me than all other
men.”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon sat playing with his dagger, throwing it from
one hand to the other.</p>
<p class="c015">“These are strange words to hear from a man’s betrothed
maiden,” said he. “Things promise well for us
two now, Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin drew a deep breath:</p>
<p class="c015">“You would be ill served should you take me for your
wife now, Simon.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, God Almighty knows that so it seems indeed,”
said Simon Andressön.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then I dare hope,” said Kristin meekly and timidly,
“that you will uphold me, so that Sir Andres and my
father may let this bargain about us be undone?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Do you so?” said Simon. He was silent for a little.
“God knows whether you rightly understand what you
say.”</p>
<p class="c015">“That do I,” said Kristin. “I know the law is such
that none may force a maid to marriage against her will;
else can she take her plea before the Thing—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I trow ’tis before the bishop,” said Simon, with something
of a grim smile. “True it is, I have had no cause
to search out how the law stands in such things. And
I wot well you believe not either that ’twill come to that
pass. You know well enough that I will not hold you
to your word, if your heart is too much set against it.
But can you not understand—’tis two years now since our
marriage was agreed, and you have said no word against
it till now, when all is ready for the betrothal and the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_199">199</span>wedding. Have you thought what it will mean, if you
come forth now an seek to break the bond, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">“But you want me not either,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, but I do,” answered Simon curtly. “If you think
otherwise, you must even think better of it—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Erlend Nikulaussön and I have vowed to each other
by our Christian faith,” said she, trembling, “that if we
cannot come together in wedlock, then neither of us will
have wife or husband all our days—”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon was silent a good while. Then he said with
effort:</p>
<p class="c015">“Then I know not, Kristin, what you meant when you
said Erlend had neither drawn you on nor promised you
aught—he has lured you to set yourself against the counsel
of all your kin.—Have you thought what kind of
husband you will get, if you wed a man who took another’s
wife to be his paramour—and now would take for wife
another man’s betrothed maiden—?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin gulped down her tears; she whispered thickly:</p>
<p class="c015">“This you say but to hurt me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you I would wish to hurt you?” asked Simon
in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not as it would have been, had you—” said Kristin
falteringly. “You were not asked either, Simon—’twas
your father and my father who made the pact. It
had been otherwise had you chosen me yourself—”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon stuck his dagger into the bench so that it stood
upright. A little after he drew it out again, and tried
to slip it back into its sheath, but it would not go down,
the point was bent. Then he sat passing it from hand to
hand as before.</p>
<p class="c015">“You know yourself,” said he in a low tone, and with
a shaking voice, “you know that you lie, if you would
have it that I did not—You know well enough, what
I would have spoken of with you—many times—when you
met me so that I had not been a man, had I been able
<span class="pageno" id="Page_200">200</span>to say it—after that—not if they had tried to drag it out
of me with redhot pincers....</p>
<p class="c015">“—First I thought ’twas yonder dead lad. I thought
I must leave you in peace awhile—you knew me not—I
deemed ’twould have been a wrong to trouble you so soon
after. Now I see you did not need so long a time to
forget—now—now—now—”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Kristin quietly. “I know it, Simon. Now
I cannot look that you should be my friend any longer.”</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>Friend—!</i>” Simon gave a short, strange laugh. “Do
you need my friendship now, then?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin grew red.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are a man,” said she softly. “And old enough
now—you can choose yourself whom you will wed—”</p>
<p class="c015">Simon looked at her sharply. Then he laughed as before:</p>
<p class="c015">“I understand. You would have me say ’tis I who—I
am to take the blame for the breaking of our bond?</p>
<p class="c015">“If so be that your mind is fixed—if you have the will
and the boldness to try to carry through your purpose—then
I will do it,” he said low. “At home with all my
own folks and before all your kin—save one. To your
father you must tell the truth, even as it is. If you would
have it so, I will bear your message to him, and spare
you, in giving it, in so far as I can—but Lavrans Björgulfsön
shall know that never, with my will, would I go
back from one word that I have spoken to him.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin clutched the edge of the bench with both hands:
this was harder for her to bear than all else that Simon
Darre had said. Pale and fearful, she stole a glance at
him.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon rose:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now must we go in,” said he. “Methinks we are nigh
frozen, both of us, and the sister is sitting waiting with
the key.—I will give you a week to think upon the matter—I
have business in the town here. I shall come hither
<span class="pageno" id="Page_201">201</span>and speak with you when I am ready to go, but you will
scarce care to see aught of me meanwhile.”</p>
<h3 class="c013">8</h3>
<p class="c017">Kristin said to herself: now that at least is over. But
she felt broken with weariness and sick for Erlend’s arms.</p>
<p class="c015">She lay awake most of the night, and she resolved to
do what she never dared think of before—send word to
Erlend. It was not easy to find anyone who could go
such an errand for her. The lay-sisters never went out
alone, nor did she know of any of them she thought would
be willing; the men who did the farm work were elder
folk and but seldom came near the dwellings of the nuns
save to speak with the Abbess herself. There was only
Olav—He was a half-grown lad, who worked in the
gardens; he had been Lady Groa’s foster-son from the
time when he was found, a new-born babe, upon the church
steps one morning. Folk said one of the lay-sisters was
his mother; she was to have been a nun; but after she
had been kept in the dark cell for six months—for grave
disobedience, as ’twas said—and it was about that time
the child was found—she had been given the lay-sisters’
habit and had worked in the farmyard ever since. Kristin
had often thought of Sister Ingrid’s fate throughout these
months, but she had had few chances to speak with her.
It was venturesome to trust to Olav—he was but a child,
and Lady Groa and all the nuns were wont to chat and
jest with him, when they saw the boy. But Kristin deemed
it mattered little what risks she took now. And a day or
two later, when Olav was for the town one morning
Kristin sent word by him to Akersnes, that Erlend must
find some way whereby they might meet alone.</p>
<p class="c015">That same afternoon Erlend’s own man, Ulv, came to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_202">202</span>the grille. He said he was Aasmund Björgulfsön’s man,
and was to pray, on his master’s behalf, that his brother’s
daughter might go down to the town for a little, for
Aasmund had not time to come to Nonneseter. Kristin
thought this device must surely fail—but when Sister Potentia
asked if she knew the bearer of the message, she
said: “Yes.” So she went with Ulv to Brynhild Fluga’s
house.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend awaited her in the loft-room—he was uneasy
and anxious, and she knew at once, ’twas that he was afraid
again of what he seemed to fear the most.</p>
<p class="c015">Always it cut her to the soul he should feel such a
haunting dread that she might be with child—when yet
they could not keep apart. Harassed as she was this evening,
she said this to him—hotly enough. Erlend’s face
flushed darkly, and he laid his head down upon her
shoulder:</p>
<p class="c015">“You are right,” said he. “I must try to let you be,
Kristin,—not to put your happiness in such jeopardy.
If you will—”</p>
<p class="c015">She threw her arms around him and laughed, but he
caught her round the waist, forced her down upon a bench
and seated himself on the further side of the board. When
she stretched her hand over to him, he covered the palm
with vehement kisses:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have tried more than you,” said he with passion.
“You know not, how much I deem it means for both of
us, that we should be wed with all honour—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then you should not have made me yours—” said
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend hid his face in his hands.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, would to God I had not done you that wrong,”
he said.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">“Neither you nor I wish that,” said Kristin, laughing
boldly. “And if I may but be forgiven and make my
<span class="pageno" id="Page_203">203</span>peace at last with my kindred and with God, then shall I
not sorrow overmuch though I must wear the woman’s
hood when I am wed. Aye, and often it seems to me, I
could do without peace even, if only I may be with
you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You shall bring honour with you into my house once
more,” said Erlend, “not I drag <i>you</i> down into dishonour.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin shook her head. Then she said:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis like you will be glad then, when you hear that
I have talked with Simon Andressön—and he will not
hold me to the pact that was made for us by our fathers
before I met you.”</p>
<p class="c015">At once Erlend was wild with joy, and Kristin was made
to tell him all. Yet she told not of the scornful words
Simon had spoken of Erlend, though she said that before
Lavrans he would not take the blame upon himself.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis but reason,” said Erlend shortly. “They like each
other well, your father and he? Aye, me he will like less,
I trow—Lavrans.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin took these words as a sign that Erlend felt with
her she had still a hard road to travel ere yet they reached
their journey’s end; and she was thankful to him for it.
But he did not come back to this matter; he was glad
above measure, saying he had feared so that she would not
have courage to speak with Simon.</p>
<p class="c015">“You like him after a fashion, I mark well,” said he.</p>
<p class="c015">“Can it be aught to you,” asked Kristin,“—after all
that has come and gone between you and me, that I can
see that Simon is an honest man and a stout.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Had you never met me,” said Erlend, “you might well
have had good days with him, Kristin. Why laugh you?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, I did but call to mind somewhat Lady Aashild said
once,” answered Kristin. “I was but a child then—but
’twas somewhat about good days falling to wise folk, but
the best days of all to those who dare be unwise.”</p>
<p class="c015">“God bless my kinswoman, if she taught you that,” said
<span class="pageno" id="Page_204">204</span>Erlend and took her upon his knee. “’Tis strange, Kristin,
never have I marked that you were afraid.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you never marked it?” she asked as she nestled
close to him.</p>
<p class="c015">He seated her on the bed-side and drew off her shoes,
but then drew her back again to the table.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, my Kristin—now at last it looks as if bright days
might come for us two. Methinks I had never dealt with
you as I have done,” he said stroking and stroking her
hair, “had it not been that each time I saw you, I thought
ever ’twas not reason that they should give so fine and
fair a wife to <i>me</i>.—Sit you down here and drink to me,”
he begged.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">A moment after came a knock on the door—it sounded
like the stroke of a sword hilt.</p>
<p class="c015">“Open, Erlend Nikulaussön, if you are within.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis Simon Darre,” said Kristin in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“Open, man, in the devil’s name—if you be a man!”
shouted Simon and beat on the door again.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend went to the bed and took his sword down from
the peg in the wall. He looked round, at a loss what
to do: “There is nowhere here you can hide—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould scarce make things better if I hid,” said Kristin.
She had risen to her feet; she spoke very quietly,
but Erlend saw that she was trembling. “You must open,”
she said in the same tone. Simon hammered on the door
again.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend went and drew the bolt. Simon stepped in;
he had a drawn sword in his hand, but he thrust it back
into its sheath at once.</p>
<p class="c015">For a while the three stood in silence. Kristin trembled;
but yet, in this first moment, she felt a strange,
sweet thrill—from deep within her something rose, scenting
the combat between two men—she drew a deep breath;
here was an end to these endless months of dumb waiting
<span class="pageno" id="Page_205">205</span>and longing and dread. She looked from one to the other,
pale and with shining eyes—then the strain within her
broke in a chill, unfathomable despair. There was more
of cold scorn than of rage or jealousy in Simon Darre’s
eyes and she saw that Erlend, behind his defiant bearing,
burned with shame. It dawned upon her, how other men
would think of him, who had let her come to him in such
a place, and she saw ’twas as though he had had to suffer
a blow in the face; she knew he burned to draw his sword
and fall upon Simon.</p>
<p class="c015">“Why have you come hither, Simon?” she cried aloud
in dread.</p>
<p class="c015">Both men turned toward her.</p>
<p class="c015">“To fetch you home,” said Simon. “Here you cannot
be—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not for you, any more, to lay commands on
Kristin Lavransdatter,” said Erlend fiercely, “she is mine
now—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I doubt not she is,” said Simon savagely, “and a fair
bridal bower have you brought her to—” He stood a
little, panting; then he mastered his voice and spoke quietly:
“But so it is that I am her betrothed still—till her
father can come for her. And for so long I mean to guard
with edge and point so much of her honour as can be
saved—in others’ eyes—”</p>
<p class="c015">“What need of <i>you</i> to guard her; I can—” he flushed
red as blood under Simon’s eyes. Then, flying out:
“Think you I will suffer threats from a boy like you,” he
cried, laying his hand on his sword-hilt.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon clapped both hands behind him.</p>
<p class="c015">“I am not such a coward as to be afraid you should
deem me afraid,” said he as before. “I will fight you,
Erlend Nikulaussön, you may stake your soul upon that,
if within due time, you have not made suit for Kristin
to her father—”</p>
<p class="c015">“That will I never do at your bidding, Simon Andressön,”
<span class="pageno" id="Page_206">206</span>said Erlend angrily; the blood rushed into his face
again.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay—do you it to set right the wrong you have done
so young a maid,” answered Simon, unmoved, “’twill be
better so for Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin gave a loud cry, in pain at Erlend’s pain. She
stamped upon the floor:</p>
<p class="c015">“Go, then, Simon, go—what have you to do with our
affairs?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I told you but now,” said Simon. “You must bear with
me till your father has loosed you and me from each
other.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin broke down utterly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Go, go, I will follow straightway—. Jesus! why do
you torture me so, Simon—you know you deem not yourself
I am worthy that you should trouble about me—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not for your sake I do it,” answered Simon. “Erlend—will
you not tell her to go with me?”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend’s face quivered. He touched her on the shoulder:</p>
<p class="c015">“You must go, Kristin. Simon Darre and I will speak
of this at another time—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin got up obediently and fastened her cloak about
her. Her shoes stood by the bed-side—She remembered
them, but she could not put them on under Simon’s eyes.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Outside, the fog had come down again. Kristin flew
along, with head bent and hands clutched tight in the
folds of her cloak. Her throat was bursting with tears—wildly
she longed for some place where she could be
alone, and sob and sob. The worst, the worst was still
before her; but she had proved a new thing this evening,
and she writhed under it—she had proved how it felt to
see the man to whom she had given herself humbled.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon was at her elbow as she hurried through the
lanes, over the common lands and across the open places,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_207">207</span>where the houses had vanished and there was naught but
fog to be seen. Once when she stumbled over something,
he caught her arm and kept her from falling:</p>
<p class="c015">“No need to run so fast,” said he. “Folk are staring
after us.—How you are trembling!” he said more gently.
Kristin held her peace and walked on.</p>
<p class="c015">She slipped in the mud of the street, her feet were wet
through and icy cold—the hose she had on were leather,
but they were thin; she felt they were giving way, and
the mud was oozing through to her naked feet.</p>
<p class="c015">They came to the bridge over the convent beck, and
went more slowly up the slopes on the other side.</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin,” said Simon of a sudden, “your father must
never come to know of this.”</p>
<p class="c015">“How knew you that I was—there?” asked Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“I came to speak with you,” answered Simon shortly.
“Then they told me of this man of your uncle’s coming.
I knew Aasmund was in Hadeland. You two are not over
cunning at making up tales—Heard you what I said
but now?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Kristin.—“It was I who sent word to
Erlend that we should meet at Fluga’s house; I knew the
woman—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then shame upon you! But, oh, you could not know
what she is—and he—Do you hear,” said Simon
harshly, “if so be it <i>can</i> be hidden, you must hide from
Lavrans what you have thrown away. And if you cannot
hide it, then you must strive to spare him the worst
of the shame.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You are ever so marvellous careful for my father,”
said Kristin, trembling. She strove to speak defiantly,
but her voice was ready to break with sobs.</p>
<p class="c015">Simon walked on a little. Then he stopped—she caught
a glimpse of his face, as they stood there alone together
in the midst of the fog. He had never looked like this
before.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_208">208</span>“I have seen it well, each time I was at your home,”
said he, “how little you understood, you his women-folk,
what a man Lavrans is. Knows not how to rule you,
says yonder Trond Gjesling—and ’twere like he should
trouble himself with such work—he who was born to rule
over <i>men</i>. He was made for a leader, aye, and one whom
men would have followed—gladly. These are no times
for such men as he—my father knew him at Baagahus—But,
as things are, he has lived his life up there in the
Dale, as he were little else but a farmer—He was married
off all too young—and your mother, with her heavy
mood, was not the one to make it lighter for him to live
that life. So it is that he has many friends—but think
you there is <i>one</i> who is his fellow—His sons were
taken from him—’twas you, his daughters, who were to build
up his race after him—must he live now to see the day
when one is without health and the other without honour—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin pressed her hands tightly over her heart—she
felt she must hold it in to make herself as hard as she
had need to be.</p>
<p class="c015">“Why say you this?” she whispered after a time. “It
cannot be that you would ever wish to wed me now—”</p>
<p class="c015">“That—would I—not,” said Simon unsteadily. “God
help me, Kristin—I think of you that evening in the loft-room
at Finsbrekken.—But may the foul fiend fly away
with me living the day I trust a maiden’s eyes again!</p>
<p class="c015">“—Promise me, that you will not see Erlend before
your father comes,” said he when they stood at the gate.</p>
<p class="c015">“That will I not promise,” answered Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then <i>he</i> shall promise,” said Simon.</p>
<p class="c015">“I will not see him,” said Kristin quickly.</p>
<p class="c015">“The little dog I sent you once,” said Simon before
they parted, “him you can let your sisters have—they are
grown so fond of him—if you mislike not too much to
see him in the house.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_209">209</span>“—I ride north to-morrow early,” said he, and then
he took her hand in farewell, while the sister who kept
the door looked on.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Simon Darre walked downwards towards the town. He
flung out a clenched fist as he strode along, talked half
aloud, and swore out into the fog. He swore to himself
that he grieved not over <i>her</i>. Kristin—’twas as though
he had deemed a thing pure gold—and when he saw it
close at hand, it was naught but brass and tin. White as
a snow flake had she knelt and thrust her hand into
the flame—that was last year; this year she was drinking
wine with an outcast ribald in Fluga’s loft-room—The
devil, no! ’Twas for Lavrans Björgulfsön he grieved,
sitting up there on Jörundgaard believing—full surely
never had it come into Lavran’s mind that he could be
so betrayed by his own. And now he himself was to
bear the tidings, and help to lie to <i>that</i> man—it
was for this that his heart burned with sorrow and
wrath.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had not meant to keep her promise to Simon
Darre, but, as it befell, she spoke but a few words with
Erlend—one evening up on the road.</p>
<p class="c015">She stood and held his hand, strangely meek, while
he spoke of what had befallen in Brynhild’s loft-room
at their last meeting. With Simon Andressön he would
talk another time. “Had we fought there, ’twould have
been all over the town,” said Erlend hotly. “And that
he too knew full well—this Simon.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin saw how this thing had galled him. She too,
had thought of it unceasingly ever since—there was no
hiding the truth, Erlend came out of this business with
even less honour than she herself. And she felt that now
indeed they were one flesh—that she must answer for all
he did, even though she might mislike his deeds, and that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_210">210</span>she would feel it in her own flesh when so much as
Erlend’s skin was scratched.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Three weeks later Lavrans Björgulfsön came to Oslo to
fetch his daughter.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was afraid, and she was sore of heart as she
went to the parlour to meet her father. What first struck
her, when she saw him standing there speaking to Sister
Potentia, was that he did not look as she remembered
him. Maybe he was but little changed since they parted
a year ago—but she had seen him all her years at home
as the young lusty, comely man she had been so proud to
have for father when she was little. Each winter and each
summer that passed over their heads up there at home,
had doubtless marked him with the marks of growing
age, as they had unfolded her into a full-grown young
woman—but she had not seen it. She had not seen that
his hair was fading here and there and had taken on a
tinge of rusty red near the temples—as yellow hair does
when ’tis turning grey. His cheeks had shrunken and
grown longer so that the muscles ran in harder lines down
to the mouth; his youthful white and red had faded to
one weather-beaten shade. His back was not bowed—but
yet his shoulder-blades had an unaccustomed curve beneath
his cloak. His step was light and firm, as he came
toward her with outstretched hand, but yet ’twas not the
old brisk and supple motion. Doubtless all these things
had been there last year, only she had not seen them.
Perhaps there had been added a little touch—of sadness—which
made her see them now. She burst into weeping.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans put his arm about her shoulder and laid his
hand against her cheek.</p>
<p class="c015">“Come, come, be still now, child,” he said gently.</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you angry with me, father?” she asked low.</p>
<p class="c015">“Surely you must know that I am,” he answered—but
he went on stroking her cheek. “Yet so much, too, you
<span class="pageno" id="Page_211">211</span>sure must know, that you have no need to be afraid of
me,” said he sadly. “Nay, now you must be still, Kristin:
are you not ashamed to bear you in such childish wise.”—For
she was weeping so that she had to seat herself
upon the bench. “We will not speak of these things
here, where folk go out and in,” said he, and he sat himself
down by her side and took her hand. “Will you
not ask after your mother then—and your sisters—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“What does my mother say of this?” asked his daughter.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, that you can have no need to ask—but we will
not talk of it now,” he said again. “Else she is well—”
and he set to telling this and that of the happenings at
home on the farm, till Kristin grew quieter little by
little.</p>
<p class="c015">But it seemed to her that the strain did but grow worse
because her father said naught of her breach of troth.
He gave her money to deal out among the poor of the
convent and to make gifts to her fellow-pupils, he himself
gave rich gifts to the cloister and the Sisters; and
no one in Nonneseter knew aught else than that Kristin
was now to go home for her betrothal and her wedding.
They both ate the last meal at Lady Groa’s board in the
Abbess’s room, and the Lady spoke of Kristin with high
praise.</p>
<p class="c015">But all this came to an end at last. She had said her
last farewell to the Sisters and her friends at the convent
gate; Lavrans led her to her horse and lifted her into
the saddle. ’Twas so strange to ride with her father and
the men from Jörundgaard down to the bridge, along this
road, down which she had stolen in the dark; wonderful,
too, it seemed to ride through the streets of Oslo freely
and in honour. She thought of their splendid wedding
train, that Erlend had talked of so often—her heart grew
heavy; ’twould have been easier had he carried her away
with him. There was yet such a long time before her
in which she must live one life in secret and another
<span class="pageno" id="Page_212">212</span>openly before folks. But then her eye fell on her father’s
grave, ageing face, and she tried to think, that after all
Erlend was right.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">There were a few other travellers in the inn. At eventide
they all supped together in a little hearth-room, where
there were two beds only; Lavrans and Kristin were to
sleep there, for they were the first in rank among the
guests. Therefore, when the night drew on a little, the
others bade them a friendly good-night as they broke
up and went to seek their sleeping places. Kristin thought
how it was she who had stolen to Brynhild Fluga’s loft-room
to Erlend’s arms—sick with sorrow and with fear
that she might never more be his, she thought: no, there
was no place for her any more amongst these others.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father was sitting on the further bench, looking at
her.</p>
<p class="c015">“We are not to go to Skog this time?” asked Kristin,
to break the silence.</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” answered Lavrans. “I have had enough for some
time with what your mother’s brother made me listen
to—because I would not constrain you,” he added, as she
looked up at him questioningly.</p>
<p class="c015">“And, truly, I would have made you keep your word,”
said he a little after, “had it not been that Simon said,
he would not have an unwilling wife.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have never given my word to Simon,” said Kristin
quickly. “You have ever said before, that you would
never force me into wedlock—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould not have been force if I had held you to a
bargain that had been published long since and was
known to all men,” answered Lavrans. “These two winters
past you two have borne the name of handfasted folk, and
you have said naught against it, nor shown yourself unwilling,
till now your wedding-day was fixed. If you would
plead that the business was put off last year, so that you
<span class="pageno" id="Page_213">213</span>have not yet given Simon your troth; then that I call not
upright dealing.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood gazing down into the fire.</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not which will seem the worse,” went on her
father, “that it be said that you have cast off Simon, or
that he has cast you off. Sir Andres sent me word—”
Lavrans flushed red as he said it, “—he was wroth with
the lad, and bade me crave such amends as I should think
fit. I had to say what was true—I know not if aught else
had been better—that, should there be amends to make,
’twas rather for us to make them. We are shamed either
way.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot think there is such great shame,” said Kristin
low. “Since Simon and I are of one mind.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Of one mind?” repeated Lavrans. “He did not hide
from me that he was unhappy, but he said, after you
had spoken together, he deemed naught but misfortune
could come of it if he held you to the pact.—But now
must you tell me how this has come over you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Has Simon said naught?” asked Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“It seemed as though he thought,” said her father,
“that you have given your love to another man—Now
must you tell me how this is, Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought for a little.</p>
<p class="c015">“God knows,” said she in a low voice, “I see well,
Simon might be good enough for me, and maybe too
good. But ’tis true that I came to know another man; and
then I knew I would never have one happy hour more in
all my life, were I to live it out with Simon—not if
all the gold in England were his to give—I would rather
have the other if he owned no more than a single
cow—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You look not that I should give you to a serving-man,
I trow?” said her father.</p>
<p class="c015">“He is as well born as I, and better,” answered Kristin.
“I meant but this—he has enough both of lands
<span class="pageno" id="Page_214">214</span>and goods, but I would rather sleep with him on the bare
straw than with another man in a silken bed—”</p>
<p class="c015">Her father was silent for a while.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis one thing, Kristin, that I will not force you to
take a man that likes you not—though God and St. Olav
alone know what you can have against the man I had
promised you to. But ’tis another thing whether the man
you have set your heart upon is such as I can wed you to.
You’re young yet, and not over wise—and to cast his eyes
upon a maid who is promised to another—’tis not the wont
of an upright man—”</p>
<p class="c015">“No man can rule himself in that matter,” broke in
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, but he can. But so much you can understand,
I trow: I will not do such offence to the Dyfrin folk as to
betroth you to another the moment you have turned your
back on Simon—and least of all to a man who might be
more high in rank or richer—You must say who this
man is,” he said after a little.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin pressed her hands together and breathed deeply.
Then she said very slowly:</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot, father. Thus it stands, that should I not
get this man, then you can take me back to the convent
and never take me from it again—I shall not live long
there, I trow. But it would not be seemly that I should
name his name, ere yet I know he bears as good a will
toward me as I have to him. You—you must not force
me to say who he is, before—before ’tis seen whether—whether
he is minded to make suit for me through his
kin.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was a long time silent. He could not but be
pleased that his daughter took the matter thus; he said at
length:</p>
<p class="c015">“So be it then. ’Tis but reason that you would fain
keep back his name, if you know not more of his purposes.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_215">215</span>“Now must you to bed, Kristin,” he said a little after.
He came and kissed her:</p>
<p class="c015">“You have wrought sorrow and pain to many by this
waywardness of yours, my daughter—but this you know,
that your good lies next my heart—God help me, ’twould
be so, I fear me, whatever you might do—He and His
gentle Mother will surely help us, so that this may be
turned to the best—Go now, and see that you sleep well.”</p>
<p class="c015">After he had lain down, Lavrans thought he heard a little
sound of weeping from the bed by the other wall, where
his daughter lay. But he made as though he slept. He
had not the heart to say to her that he feared the old talk
about her and Arne and Bentein would be brought up
again now, but it weighed heavily upon him that ’twas but
little he could do to save the child’s good name from being
besmirched behind his back. And the worst was that he
must deem much of the mischief had been wrought by her
own thoughtlessness.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_217">217</span>
<h2 class="c009">BOOK THREE</h2>
</div>
<div class="c012"><span class="c004">LAVRANS BJÖRGULFSÖN</span></div>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c006"/>
</div>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_219">219</span>
<h3 class="c013">1</h3>
</div>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">KRISTIN came home when the spring was at fairest.
The Laagen rushed headlong round its bend past
the farmstead and the fields; through the tender
leaves of the alder thickets its current glittered and
sparkled with flashes of silver. ’Twas as though the gleams
of light had a voice of their own and joined in the river’s
song, for when the evening twilight fell, the waters seemed
to go by with a duller roar. But day and night the air
above Jörundgaard was filled with the rushing sound, till
Kristin thought she could feel the very timbers of the
houses quivering like the sound box of a cithern.</p>
<p class="c015">Small threads of water shone high up on the fell-sides,
that stood wrapped in blue haze day after day. The heat
brooded and quivered over the fields; the brown earth
of the plough-lands was nigh hidden by the spears of
corn; the meadows grew deep with grass, and shimmered
like silk where the breaths of wind passed over. Groves
and hill sward smelt sweet; and as soon as the sun was
down there streamed out all around the strong, cool,
sourish breath of sap and growing things—it was as
though the earth gave out a long, lightened sigh. Kristin
thought, trembling, of the moment when Erlend’s arms
released her. Each evening she lay down, sick with longing,
and in the mornings she awoke, damp with sweat and
tired out with her dreams.</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas more than she could understand how the folks at
home could forbear to speak ever a word of the one thing
that was in her thoughts. But week went by after week,
and naught was said of Simon and her broken faith, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_220">220</span>none asked what was in her heart. Her father lay much
out in the woods, now he had the spring ploughing and
sowing off his hands—he went to see his tar burners’
work, and he took hawks and hounds with him and
was away many days together. When he was at home, he
spoke to his daughter kindly as ever—but it was as though
he had little to say to her, and never did he ask her to go
with him when he rode out.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had dreaded to go home to her mother’s chidings;
but Ragnfrid said never a word—and this seemed even
worse.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Every year when he feasted his friends at St. John’s
Mass, it was Lavrans Björgulfsön’s wont to give out among
the poor folks of the parish the meat and all sorts of
food that had been saved in his household in the last week
of the Fast. Those who lived nighest to Jörundgaard
would come themselves to fetch away the alms; these poor
folks were ever welcomed and feasted, and Lavrans and his
guests and all the house servants would gather round them:
for some of them were old men who had by heart many
sagas and lays. They sat in the hearth-room and whiled
the time away with the ale-cup and friendly talk; and in
the evening they danced in the courtyard.</p>
<p class="c015">This year the Eve of St. John was cloudy and cold;
but none was sorry that it was so, for by now the farmers
of the Dale had begun to fear a drought. No rain had
fallen since St. Halvard’s Wake, and there had been little
snow in the mountains; not for thirteen years could folk
remember to have seen the river so low at mid-summer.</p>
<p class="c015">So Lavrans and his guests were of good cheer when they
went down to greet the almsmen in the hearth-room. The
poor folks sat round the board eating milk porridge and
washing it down with strong ale; and Kristin stood by the
table, and waited on the old folk and the sick.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans greeted his poor guests, and asked if they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_221">221</span>were content with their fare. Then he went about the
board to bid welcome to an old bedesman, who had been
brought thither that day for his term at Jörundgaard. The
man’s name was Haakon; he had fought under King
Haakon the Old, and had been with the King when he
took the field for the last time in Scotland. He was the
poorest of the poor now, and was all but blind; the
farmers of the Dale had offered to set him up in a cottage
of his own, but he chose rather to be handed on as bedesman
from farm to farm, for everywhere folk welcomed him
more like an honoured guest, since he had seen so much
of the world and had laid up great store of knowledge.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans stood by with a hand on his brother’s shoulder;
for Aasmund Björgulfsön had come to Jörundgaard on a
visit.</p>
<p class="c015">He asked Haakon, too, how the food liked him.</p>
<p class="c015">“The ale is good, Lavrans Björgulfsön,” said Haakon,
“But methinks a jade has cooked our porridge for us
to-day. While the cook cuddles, the porridge burns, says
the byword; and this porridge is singed.”</p>
<p class="c015">“An ill thing indeed,” said Lavrans, “that I should give
you singed porridge. But I wot well the old byword
doth not always say true, for ’tis my daughter, herself, who
cooked the porridge for you.” He laughed, and bade
Kristin and Tordis make haste to bring in the trenchers
of meat.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin slipped quickly out and made across to the
kitchen. Her heart was beating hard—she had caught a
glimpse of Aasmund’s face when Haakon was speaking.</p>
<p class="c015">That evening she saw her father and his brother walking
and talking together in the courtyard long and late. She
was dizzy with fear; and it was no better with her the
next day when she marked that her father was silent and
joyless. But he said no word.</p>
<p class="c015">Nor did he say aught after his brother was gone. But
Kristin marked well that he spoke less with Haakon than
<span class="pageno" id="Page_222">222</span>was his wont, and, when their turn for harbouring the
old warrior was over, Lavrans made no sign towards keeping
him a while longer, but let him move on to the next
farm.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">For the rest, Lavrans Björgulfsön had reason enough
this summer to be moody and downcast, for now all
tokens showed that the year would be an exceedingly bad
one in all the country round; and the farmers were coming
together time and again to take counsel how they should
meet the coming winter. As the late summer drew on,
it was plain to most, that they must slaughter great part
of their cattle or drive them south for sale, and buy corn
to feed their people through the winter. The year before
had been no good corn year, so that the stocks of
old corn were but scanty.</p>
<p class="c015">One morning in early autumn Ragnfrid went out with
all her three daughters to see to some linen she had lying
out on the bleach field. Kristin praised much her mother’s
weaving. Then the mother stroked little Ramborg’s hair
and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“We must save this for your bride-chest, little
one.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Then, mother,” said Ulvhild, “shall I not have any
bride-chest when I go to the nunnery?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You know well,” said Ragnfrid, “your dowry will be
nowise less than your sisters. But ’twill not be such
things as they need that you will need. And then you
know full well, too, that you are to bide with your father
and me as long as we live—if so be you will.”</p>
<p class="c015">“And when you come to the nunnery,” said Kristin, unsteadily,
“it may be, Ulvhild, that I shall have been a nun
there for many years.”</p>
<p class="c015">She looked across at her mother, but Ragnfrid held
her peace.</p>
<p class="c015">“Had I been such an one that I could marry,” said
<span class="pageno" id="Page_223">223</span>Ulvhild, “never would I have turned away from Simon—he
was so kind, and he was so sorrowful when he said
farewell to us all.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You know your father bade us not speak of this,” said
Ragnfrid—but Kristin broke in defiantly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye; well I know that ’twas far more sorrow for him
parting from you than from me.”</p>
<p class="c015">Her mother spoke in anger:</p>
<p class="c015">“And little must his pride have been, I wot, had he
shown his sorrow before you—you dealt not well and
fairly by Simon Andressön, my daughter. Yet did he beg
us to use neither threats nor curses with you—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay,” said Kristin as before, “he thought, maybe, he
had cursed me himself so much, there was no need for any
other to tell me how vile I was. But I marked not ever
that Simon had much care for me, till he saw that I loved
another more than him.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Go home, children,” said Ragnfrid to the two little
ones. She sat herself down on a log that lay by the
green, and drew Kristin down beside her.</p>
<p class="c015">“You know, surely,” said she then, “that it has ever been
held seemly and honourable, that a man should not talk
overmuch of love to his betrothed maiden—nor sit with
her much alone, nor woo too hotly—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh!” said Kristin, “much I wonder whether young folk
that love one another bear ever in mind what old folk
count for seemly, and forget not one time or another all
such things.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Be you ware, Kristin,” said her mother, “that you forget
them not.” She sat a little while in silence: “What
I see but too well now is that your father goes in fear
that you have set your heart on a man he can never gladly
give you to.”</p>
<p class="c015">“What did my uncle say?” asked Kristin in a little
while.</p>
<p class="c015">“Naught said he,” answered her mother, “but that Erlend
<span class="pageno" id="Page_224">224</span>of Husaby is better of name than of fame. Aye, for he
spoke to Aasmund, it seems, to say a good word for him
to Lavrans. Small joy was it to your father when he
heard this.”</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin sat beaming with gladness. Erlend had
spoken to her father’s brother. And she had been vexing
her heart because he made no sign!</p>
<p class="c015">Then her mother spoke again:</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet another thing is: that Aasmund said somewhat of
a waif word that went about in Oslo, that folk had seen
this Erlend hang about in the by-ways near by the convent,
and that you had gone out and spoken with him by
the fences there.”</p>
<p class="c015">“What then?” asked Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aasmund counselled us, you understand, to take this
proffer,” said Ragnfrid. “But at that Lavrans grew more
wroth than I can call to mind I saw him ever before. He
said that a wooer who tried to come to his daughter by that
road should find him in his path, sword in hand. ’Twas
little honour enough to us to have dealt as we had with
the Dyfrin folk; but were it so that Erlend had lured
you out to gad about the ways in the darkness with him,
and that while you were dwelling in a cloister of holy nuns,
’twas a full good token you would be better served by far
by missing such a husband.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin crushed her hands together in her lap—the colour
came and went in her face. Her mother put an arm about
her waist—but the girl shrank away from her, beside
herself with the passion of her mood, and cried:</p>
<p class="c015">“Let me be, mother! Would you feel, maybe, if my
waist hath grown—”</p>
<p class="c015">The next moment she was standing up, holding her hand
to her cheek—she looked down bewildered at her mother’s
flashing eyes. None had ever struck her before since she
was a little child.</p>
<p class="c015">“Sit down,” said Ragnfrid. “Sit down,” she said again,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_225">225</span>and the girl was fain to obey. The mother sat a while
silent; when she spoke, her voice was shaking:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have seen it full well, Kristin—much have you never
loved me. I told myself, maybe ’twas that you thought I
loved not you so much—not as your father loves you. I
bided my time—I thought when the time came that you had
borne a child yourself, you would surely understand—</p>
<p class="c015">“While yet I was suckling you, even then was it so, that
when Lavrans came near us two, you would let go my
breast and stretch out towards him, and laugh so that my
milk ran over your lips. Lavrans thought ’twas good
sport—and God knows I was well content for his sake. I
was well content, too, for your sake, that your father
laughed and was merry each time he laid eyes on you. I
thought my own self ’twas pity of you, you little being,
that I could not have done with all that much weeping.
I was ever thinking more whether I was to lose you too,
than joying that I had you. But God and His Holy Mother
know that I loved you no whit less than Lavrans loved.”</p>
<p class="c015">The tears were running down over Ragnfrid’s cheeks,
but her face was quite calm now, and so too was her
voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“God knows I never bore him or you a grudge for the
love that was between you. Methought ’twas little enough
joy I had brought him in the years we had lived together;
I was glad that he had joy in you. I thought, too,
that had my father, Ivar, been such a father to me—</p>
<p class="c015">“There are many things, Kristin, that a mother should
have taught her daughter to beware of. But methought
there was little need of this with you, who have followed
about with your father all these years—you should know,
if any know, what right and honour are. That word you
spoke but now—think you I could believe you would have
the heart to bring on Lavrans such a sorrow—?</p>
<p class="c015">“I would say but this to you—my wish is that you may win
for husband a man you can love well. But that this may
<span class="pageno" id="Page_226">226</span>be, you must bear you wisely—let not Lavrans have cause
to think that he you have chosen is a breeder of trouble,
and one that regards not the peace of women, nor their
honour. For to such an one he will never give you—not
if it were to save you from open shame. Rather
would Lavrans let the steel do judgment between him and
the man who had marred your life—”</p>
<p class="c015">And with this the mother rose and went from her.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">2</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">At the Haugathing field on the day of Bartholomew’s
Mass, the 24th of August, the daughter’s son of King Haakon
of happy memory was hailed as King. Among the men sent
thither from Northern Gudbrandsdal was Lavrans Björgulfsön.
He had had the name of kingsman since his youth,
but in all these years he had seldom gone nigh the Household,
and the good name he had won in the war against
Duke Eirik he had never sought to turn to account. Nor
had he now much mind to this journey to the homaging, but
he could not deny himself to the call. Besides, he and the
other Thing-men from the upper valley were charged to try
and buy corn in the South and send it round by ship to
Romsdal.</p>
<p class="c015">The folk of the parishes round about were heartless now,
and went in dread of the winter that was at hand. An ill
thing, too, the farmers deemed it that once again a child
would be King in Norway. Old folks called to mind the
time when King Magnus was dead and his sons were little
children, and Sira Eirik said:</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>Vae terræ, ubi puer rex est.</i> Which in the Norse tongue
is: No resting o’ nights for rats in the house where the
cat’s a kitten.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid Ivarsdatter managed all things on the manor
while her husband was gone, and it was good both for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_227">227</span>Kristin and for her that they had their heads and hands
full of household cares and work. All over the parish
the folks were busy gathering in moss from the hills and
stripping bark from the trees, for the hay-crop had been
but light, and of straw there was next to none; and even
the leaves gathered after St. John’s Eve were yellow and
sapless. On Holy Cross day, when Sira Eirik bore the
crucifix about the fields, there were many in the procession
who wept and prayed aloud to God to have mercy on the
people and the dumb beasts.</p>
<p class="c015">A week after Holy Cross Lavrans Björgulfsön came
home from the Thing.</p>
<p class="c015">It was long past the house-folks’ bedtime, but Ragnfrid
still sat in the weaving-house. She had so much to see
to in the day-time now, that she often worked on late into
the night at weaving and sewing. Ragnfrid liked the
house well too. It had the name of being the oldest on
the farm; it was called the Mound-house, and folk said
it had stood there ever since the old heathen ages. Kristin
and the girl called Astrid were with Ragnfrid; they were
sitting spinning by the hearth.</p>
<p class="c015">They had been sitting for a while sleepy and silent,
when they heard the hoof-beats of a single horse—a man
came riding at a gallop into the wet farm-place. Astrid
went to the outer room to look out—in a moment she
came in again, followed by Lavrans Björgulfsön.</p>
<p class="c015">Both his wife and his daughter saw at once that he
had been drinking more than a little. He reeled in his
walk, and held to the pole of the smoke-vent while Ragnfrid
took from him his dripping wet cloak and hat and unbuckled
his sword-belt.</p>
<p class="c015">“What have you done with Halvdan and Kolbein?” she
said, in some fear; “have you left them behind on the
road?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No, I left them behind at Loptsgaard,” he said with a
little laugh. “I had such a mind to come home again—there
<span class="pageno" id="Page_228">228</span>was no rest for me till I did—the men went to bed
down at Loptsgaard, but I took Guldsveinen and galloped
home—”</p>
<p class="c015">“You must find me a little food, Astrid,” he said to the
servant. “Bring it in here, girl; then you need not go so
far in the rain. But be quick, for I have eaten no food
since early morning—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Had you no food at Loptsgaard, then?” asked his
wife in wonder.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat rocking from side to side on the bench,
laughing a little:</p>
<p class="c015">“Food there was, be sure—but I had no stomach for it
when I was there. I drank a while with Sigurd—but—methought
then ’twas as well I should come home at once
as wait till to-morrow—”</p>
<p class="c015">Astrid came back bearing food and ale; she brought with
her, too, a pair of dry shoes for her master.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans fumbled with his spur-buckles to unloosen
them; but came near to falling on his face.</p>
<p class="c015">“Come hither, Kristin, my girl,” he said, “and help
your father. I know you will do it from a loving heart—aye,
a loving heart—to-day.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin kneeled down to obey. Then he took her head
between his two hands and turned her face up:</p>
<p class="c015">“One thing I trow you know, my daughter—I wish for
naught but your good. Never would I give you sorrow, except
I see that thereby I save you from many sorrows to
come. You are full young yet, Kristin—’twas but seventeen
years old you were this year—three days after Halvard’s
Mass—but seventeen years old—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had done with her service now. She was a
little pale as she rose from her knees and sat down again
on her stool by the hearth.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavran’s head seemed to grow somewhat clearer as
he ate and was filled. He answered his wife’s questions
and the servant maid’s about the Haugathing—Aye, ’twas a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_229">229</span>fair gathering. They had managed to buy corn, and some
flour and malt, part at Oslo and part at Tunsberg; the wares
were from abroad—they might have been better, but they
might have been worse too. Aye, he had met many, both
kinsfolk and friends, and they had sent their greetings
home with him—But the answers dropped from him,
one by one, as he sat there.</p>
<p class="c015">“I spoke with Sir Andres Gudmundsön,” he said, when
Astrid was gone out. “Simon marries the young widow at
Manvik; he has held his betrothal feast. The wedding
will be at Dyfrin at St. Andrew’s Mass. He has chosen
for himself this time, has the boy. I held aloof from
Sir Andres at Tunsberg, but he sought me out—’twas to
tell me he knew for sure that Simon saw Lady Halfrid for
the first time this mid-summer. He feared that I should
think Simon had this rich marriage in mind when he broke
with us.” Lavrans paused a little and laughed joylessly.
“You understand—that good and worthy man feared much
that we should believe such a thing of his son.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin breathed more freely. She thought it must be
this that had troubled her father so sorely. Maybe he had
been hoping all this time that it might come to pass after
all, her marriage with Simon Andressön. At first she had
been in dread lest he had heard some tidings of her doings
in the south at Oslo.</p>
<p class="c015">She rose up and said good-night; but her father bade
her stay yet a little.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have one more thing to tell,” said Lavrans. “I
might have held my peace about it before you—but ’tis
better you should know it. This it is, Kristin—the
man you have set your heart on, him must you strive to
forget.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had been standing with arms hanging down
and bent head. She looked up now into her father’s face.
She moved her lips, but no sound came forth that could
be heard.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_230">230</span>Lavrans looked away from his daughter’s eyes; he struck
out sideways with his hand:</p>
<p class="c015">“I wot well you know that never would I set myself
against it, could I anyways believe ’twould be for your
good.”</p>
<p class="c015">“What are the tidings that have been told you on this
journey, father?” said Kristin in a clear voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“Erlend Nikulaussön and his kinsman, Sir Munan Baardsön,
came to me at Tunsberg,” answered Lavrans. “Sir
Munan asked for you for Erlend, and I answered him:
no.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood a while, breathing heavily.</p>
<p class="c015">“Why will you not give me to Erlend Nikulaussön?”
she asked.</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not how much you know of the man you would
have for husband,” said Lavrans. “If you cannot guess
the reason for yourself, ’twill be no pleasing thing for you
to hear from my lips.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it because he has been outlawed, and banned by the
Church?” asked Kristin as before.</p>
<p class="c015">“Know you what was the cause that King Haakon banished
his near kinsman from his Court—and how at last
he fell under the Church’s ban for defying the Archbishop’s
bidding—and that when he fled the land ’twas
not alone?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Kristin. Her voice grew unsteady: “I
know, too, that he was but eighteen years old when he
first knew her—his paramour.”</p>
<p class="c015">“No older was I when I was wed,” answered Lavrans.
“We reckoned, when I was young, that at eighteen years
a man was of age to answer for himself, and care for
others’ welfare and his own.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood silent.</p>
<p class="c015">“You called her his paramour, the woman he has lived
with for ten years, and who has borne him children,” said
Lavrans after a while. “Little joy would be mine the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_231">231</span>day I sent my daughter from her home with a husband
who had lived openly with a paramour year out year in
before ever he was wed. But you know that ’twas not
loose life only, ’twas life in adultery.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin spoke low:</p>
<p class="c015">“You judged not so hardly of Lady Aashild and Sir
Björn.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet can I not say I would be fain we should wed into
their kindred,” answered Lavrans.</p>
<p class="c015">“Father,” said Kristin, “have you been so free from sin
all your life, that you can judge Erlend so hardly—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“God knows,” said Lavrans sternly, “I judge no man
to be a greater sinner before Him than I am myself. But
’tis no just reckoning that I should give away my daughter
to any man that pleases to ask for her, only because we
all need God’s forgiveness.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You know I meant it not so,” said Kristin hotly.
“Father—mother—you have been young yourselves—have
you not your youth so much in mind that you know ’tis
hard to keep oneself from the sin that comes of love—?”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans grew red as blood:</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” he said curtly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then you know not what you do,” cried Kristin wildly,
“if you part Erlend Nikulaussön and me.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat himself down again on the bench.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are but seventeen, Kristin,” he began again. “It
may be so that you and he—that you have come to be
more dear to each other than I thought could be. But
he is not so young a man but he should have known—had
he been a good man, he had never come near a young,
unripe child like you with words of love—That you
were promised to another, seemed to him, mayhap, but
a small thing.</p>
<p class="c015">“But I wed not my daughter to a man who has two
children by another’s wedded wife. You know that he
has children?”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_232">232</span>“You are too young to understand that such a wrong
breeds enmity in a kindred—and hatred without end. The
man cannot desert his own offspring, and he cannot do
them right—hardly will he find a way to bring his son
forth among good folk, or to get his daughter married
with any but a serving-man or a cottar. They were not
flesh and blood, those children, if they hated not you and
your children with a deadly hate—</p>
<p class="c015">“See you not, Kristin—such sins as these—it may be
that God may forgive such sins more easily than many
others—but they lay waste a kindred in such wise that
it can never be made whole again. I thought of Björn
and Aashild too—there stood this Munan, her son; he was
blazing with gold; he sits in the Council of the King’s
Counsellors; they hold their mother’s heritage, he and
his brothers; and he hath not come once to greet his
mother in her poverty in all these years. Aye, and ’twas
this man your lover had chosen to be his spokesman.</p>
<p class="c015">“No, I say—no. Into that kindred you shall never
come, while my head is above the ground.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin buried her face in her hands and broke into
weeping:</p>
<p class="c015">“Then will I pray God night and day, night and day,
that if you change not your will, He may take me away
from this earth.”</p>
<p class="c015">“It boots not to speak more of this to-night,” said her
father, with anguish in his voice. “You believe it not
now, maybe; but I must needs guide your life so as I
may hope to answer it hereafter. Go now, child, and rest.”</p>
<p class="c015">He held out his hand toward her; but she would not see
it and went sobbing from the room.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The father and mother sat on a while. Then Lavrans
said to his wife:</p>
<p class="c015">“Would you fetch me in a draught of ale?—no, bring
in a little wine,” he asked. “I am weary—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_233">233</span>Ragnfrid did as he asked. When she came back with
the tall wine stoup, her husband was sitting with his face
hidden in his hands. He looked up, and passed his hand
over her head-dress and her sleeves:</p>
<p class="c015">“Poor wife, now you are wet—Come, drink to me, Ragnfrid.”</p>
<p class="c015">She barely touched the cup with her lips.</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay now, drink with me,” said Lavrans vehemently, and
tried to draw her down on his knee. Unwillingly the
woman did as he bade. Lavrans said: “You will stand
by me in this thing, wife of mine, will you not? Surely
’twill be best for Kristin herself that she understand from
the very outset she must drive this man from her thoughts.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twill be hard for the child,” said the mother.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye; well do I see it will,” said Lavrans.</p>
<p class="c015">They sat silent awhile, then Ragnfrid asked:</p>
<p class="c015">“How looks he, this Erlend of Husaby?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh,” said Lavrans slowly, “a proper fellow enough—after
a fashion. But he looks not a man that is fit for
much but to beguile women.”</p>
<p class="c015">They were silent again for a while then Lavrans said:</p>
<p class="c015">“The great heritage that came to him from Sir Nikulaus—with
that I trow he has dealt so that it is much dwindled.
’Tis not for such a son-in-law that I have toiled and striven
to make my children’s lives sure.”</p>
<p class="c015">The mother wandered restlessly up and down the room.
Lavrans went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“Least of all did it like me that he sought to tempt
Kolbein with silver—to bear a secret letter to Kristin.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Looked you what was in the letter?” asked Ragnfrid.</p>
<p class="c015">“No, I did not choose,” said Lavrans curtly. “I handed
it back to Sir Munan, and told him what I thought of
such doings. Erlend had hung his seal to it too—I know
not what a man should say of such child’s tricks. Sir
Munan would have me see the device of the seal; that
’twas King Skule’s privy seal, come to Erlend through his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_234">234</span>father. His thought was, I trow, that I might bethink me
how great an honour they did me to sue for my daughter.
But ’tis in my mind that Sir Munan had scarce pressed
on this matter for Erlend so warmly, were it not that in
this man’s hands ’tis downhill with the might and honour
of the Husaby kindred, that it won in Sir Nikulaus’ and
Sir Baard’s days—No longer can Erlend look to make
such a match as befitted his birth.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid stopped before her husband:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now I know not, husband, if you are right in this
matter. First must it be said that, as times are now many
men round about us on the great estates have had to be
content with less of power and honour than their fathers
had before them. And you yourself best know that ’tis
less easy now for a man to win riches either from land
or from merchantry than it was in the old world—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know, I know,” broke in Lavrans impatiently. “All
the more does it behoove a man to guide warily the goods
that have come down to him—”</p>
<p class="c015">But his wife went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“And this, too, is to be said: I see not that Kristin
can be an uneven match for Erlend. In Sweden your kin
sit among the best, and your father, and his father before
him bore the name of knights in this land of Norway.
My forefathers were Barons of shires, son after father,
many hundred years, down to Ivar the Old; my father and
my father’s father were Wardens. True it is, neither you
nor Trond have held titles or lands under the Crown. But,
as for that, methinks it may be said that ’tis no otherwise
with Erlend Nikulaussön than with you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not the same,” said Lavrans hotly. “Power and
the knightly name lay ready to Erlend’s hand, and he
turned his back on them to go a-whoring. But now I see
you are against me too. Maybe you think, like Aasmund
and Trond, ’tis an honour for me that these great folks
would have my daughter for one of their kinsmen—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_235">235</span>Ragnfrid spoke in some heat: “I have told you, I see
not that you need be so overnice as to fear that Erlend’s
kinsmen should think they stoop in these dealings. But
see you not what all things betoken—a gentle and a biddable
child to find courage to set herself up against us and turn
away Simon Darre—have you not seen that Kristin is nowise
herself since she came back from Oslo—see you not
she goes around like one bewitched—Will you not
understand, she loves this man so sorely, that, if you yield
not, a great misfortune may befall?”</p>
<p class="c015">“What mean you by that?” asked the father, looking
up sharply.</p>
<p class="c015">“Many a man greets his son-in-law and knows not of
it,” said Ragnfrid.</p>
<p class="c015">The man seemed to stiffen where he sat; his face grew
slowly white:</p>
<p class="c015">“You that are her mother!” he said hoarsely. “Have
you—have you seen—such sure tokens—that you dare
charge your own daughter—”</p>
<p class="c015">“No, no,” said Ragnfrid quickly. “I meant it not as
you think. But when things are thus, who can tell what
has befallen, or what may befall? I have seen her heart;
not one thought hath she left but her love for this man—’twere
no marvel if one day she showed us that he is
dearer to her than her honour—or her life.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sprang up:</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, you are mad! Can you think such things of our
fair, good child? No harm, surely, can have come to
her where she was—with the holy nuns. I wot well she
is no byre-wench to go clipping behind walls and fences.
Think but of it: ’tis not possible she can have seen this
man or talked with him so many times—be sure it will
pass away; it cannot be aught but a young maid’s fancy.
God knows ’tis a heavy sight enough for me to see her
sorrow so; but be sure it must pass by in time.</p>
<p class="c015">“Life, you say, and honour—. At home here by my
<span class="pageno" id="Page_236">236</span>own hearthstone ’twill go hard if I cannot guard my own
maiden. Nor do I deem that any maid come of good
people and bred up Christianly in shamefastness will be
so quick to throw away her honour—nor yet her life. Aye,
such things are told of in songs and ballads, sure enough—but
methinks ’tis so that when a man or a maid is tempted
to do such a deed, they make up a song about it, and ease
their hearts thereby—but the deed itself they forbear to
do—</p>
<p class="c015">“You yourself,” he said, stopping before his wife:
“There was another man you would fain have wed, in those
days when we were brought together. How think you it
would have gone with you, had your father let you have
your will on that score?”</p>
<p class="c015">It was Ragnfrid now that was grown deadly pale:</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus, Maria! who hath told—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Sigurd of Loptsgaard said somewhat—’twas when we
were just come hither to the Dale,” said Lavrans. “But
answer me what I asked—Think you your life had
been gladder had Ivar given you to that man?”</p>
<p class="c015">His wife stood with head bowed low:</p>
<p class="c015">“That man,” she said—he could scarce hear the words:
“’Twas <i>he</i> would not have <i>me</i>.” A throb seemed to pass
through her body—she struck out before her with her
clenched hand.</p>
<p class="c015">The husband laid his hands softly on her shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it <i>that</i>,” he asked as if overcome, and a deep and
sorrowful wonder sounded in his voice; “—is it <i>that</i>—through
all these years—have you been sorrowing for <i>him</i>—Ragnfrid?”</p>
<p class="c015">She trembled much, but she said nothing.</p>
<p class="c015">“Ragnfrid?” he asked again. “Aye, but afterward—when
Björgulf was dead—and afterward—when you—when
you would have had me be to you as—as I could
not be. Were you thinking then of that other?” he spoke
low, in fear and bewilderment and pain.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_237">237</span>“How can you have such thoughts?” she whispered, on
the verge of weeping.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans pressed his forehead against hers and moved
his head gently from side to side.</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not. You are so strange—and all you have
said to-night. I was afraid, Ragnfrid. Like enough I
understand not the hearts of women—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid smiled palely and laid her arms about his
neck.</p>
<p class="c015">“God knows, Lavrans—I was a beggar to you because
I loved you more than ’tis good that a human soul should
love.—And I hated that other so that I felt the devil joyed
in my hate.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have held you dear, my wife,” said Lavrans, kissing
her, “aye, with all my heart have I held you dear.
You know that, surely? Methought always that we two
were happy together—Ragnfrid?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You were the best husband to me,” said she with a
little sob, and clung close to him.</p>
<p class="c015">He pressed her to him strongly:</p>
<p class="c015">“To-night I would fain sleep with you, Ragnfrid. And
if you would be to me as you were in the old days, I should
not be—such a fool—”</p>
<p class="c015">The woman seemed to stiffen in his arms—she drew
away a little:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis Fast-time.” She spoke low,—in a strange, hard
voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“It is so.” He laughed a little. “You and I, Ragnfrid—we
have kept all the fasts, and striven to do God’s
bidding in all things. And now almost I could think—maybe
we had been happier had we more to repent—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, speak not so—<i>you</i>,” she begged wildly, pressing
her thin hands to his temples. “You know well I would
not you should do aught but what you feel yourself is the
right.”</p>
<p class="c015">He drew her to him closely once more—and groaned
<span class="pageno" id="Page_238">238</span>aloud: “God help her. God help us all, my Ragnfrid—”</p>
<p class="c015">Then: “I am weary,” he said, and let her go. “And
’tis time, too, for you to go to rest.”</p>
<p class="c015">He stood by the door waiting, while she quenched the
embers on the hearth, blew out the little iron lamp by
the loom, and pinched out the glowing wick. Together
they went across through the rain to the hall.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans had set foot already on the loft-room stair,
when he turned to his wife, who was still standing in the
entry-door.</p>
<p class="c015">He crushed her in his arms again, for the last time,
and kissed her in the dark. Then he made the sign of the
cross over his wife’s face, and went up the stair.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid flung off her clothes and crept into bed. A
while she lay and listened to her husband’s steps in the
loft-room above; then she heard the bed creak, and all
was still. Ragnfrid crossed her thin arms over her
withered breasts:</p>
<p class="c015">Aye, God help her. What kind of a woman was she,
what kind of mother? She would soon be old now.
Yet was she the same; though she no longer begged
stormily for love, as when they were young and her passion
had made this man shrink and grow cold when she
would have had him be lover and not only husband. So
had it been—and so, time after time, when she was with
child, had she been humbled, beside herself with shame,
that she had not been content with his lukewarm husband-love.
And then, when things were so with her, and she
needed goodness and tenderness—then he had so much to
give; the man’s tireless, gentle thought for her, when she
was sick and tormented, had fallen on her soul like dew.
Gladly did he take up all she laid on him and bear it—but
there was ever something of his own he would not
give. She had loved her children, so that each time she
lost one, ’twas as though the heart was torn from her—God,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_239">239</span>God! what woman was she then, that even then, in
the midst of her torments, she could feel it as a drop of
sweetness that he took her sorrow in to his heart and laid
it close beside his own.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin—gladly would she have passed through the fire
for her daughter—they believed it not, neither Lavrans
nor the child—but ’twas so. Yet did she feel toward her now
an anger that was near to hate—’twas to forget his sorrow
for the child’s sorrow that he had wished to-night that he
could give himself up to his wife—</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid dared not rise, for she knew not but that Kristin
might be lying awake in the other bed. But she raised
herself noiselessly to her knees, and with forehead bent
against the footboard of the bed she strove to pray. For
her daughter, for her husband and for herself. While
her body, little by little, grew stiff with the cold, she set
out once more on one of the night-wanderings she knew
so well, striving to break her way through to a home of
peace for her heart.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">3</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">Haugen lay high up in the hills on the west side of the
valley. This moonlight night the whole world was white.
Billow after billow, the white fells lay domed under the pale-blue
heavens with their thin-strewn stars. Even the shadows
that peaks and domes stretched forth over the snow-slopes
seemed strangely thin and light, the moon was sailing
so high.</p>
<p class="c015">Downward, toward the valley, the woods stood fleecy-white
with snow and rime, round the white fields of crofts
scrolled over with tiny huts and fences. But far down in
the valley-bottom the shadows thickened into darkness.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild came out of the byre, shut the door after
her, and stood a while in the snow. White—the whole
<span class="pageno" id="Page_240">240</span>world; yet it was more than three weeks still to Advent.
Clementsmass cold—’twas like winter had come in earnest
already. Aye, aye; in bad years it was often so.</p>
<p class="c015">The old woman sighed heavily in the desolate air.
Winter again, and cold and loneliness—Then she took
up the milkpail and went towards the dwelling-house.
She looked once again down over the valley.</p>
<p class="c015">Four black dots came out of the woods half-way up the
hillside. Four men on horseback—and the moonlight
glanced from a spear-head. They were ploughing heavily
upward—none had come that way since the snowfall.
Were they coming hither?</p>
<p class="c015">Four armed men—’Twas not like that any who had
a lawful errand here would come so many in company.
She thought of the chest with her goods and Björn’s in
it. Should she hide in the outhouse?</p>
<p class="c015">She looked out again over the wintry waste about her.
Then she went into the living-house. The two old hounds
that lay before the smoky fireplace smote the floor-boards
with their tails. The young dogs Björn had with him in
the hills.</p>
<p class="c015">Aashild blew the embers of the fire into flame, and
laid more wood on them; filled the iron pot with snow
and set it on the fire; then poured the milk into a wooden
bowl and bore it to the closet beside the outer room.</p>
<p class="c015">Then she doffed her dirty, undyed, wadmal gown, that
smelt of the byre and of sweat, put on a dark-blue garment,
and changed her tow-linen hood for a coif of fine
white linen, which she smoothed down fairly round her
head and neck. Her shaggy boots of skin she drew off, and
put on silver-buckled shoes. Then she fell to setting her
room in order—smoothed the pillows and the skins in the
bed where Björn had lain that day, wiped the long-board
clean, and laid the bench-cushions straight.</p>
<p class="c015">When the dogs set up their warning barking, she was
standing by the fireplace, stirring the supper-porridge.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_241">241</span>She heard horses in the yard, and the tread of men in the
outer room; some one knocked on the door with a spear-butt.
Lady Aashild lifted the pot from the fire, settled
her dress about her, and, with the dogs at her side, went
forward to the door and opened.</p>
<p class="c015">Out in the moonlit yard were three young men holding
four horses white with rime. A man that stood before her
in the porch cried out joyfully:</p>
<p class="c015">“Moster Aashild! come you yourself to open to us?
Nay, then must I say <i>Ben trouvè</i>!”</p>
<p class="c015">“Sister’s son, is it you indeed! Then the same say I
to you! Go into the room, while I show your men the
stable.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you all alone on the farm?” asked Erlend. He followed
her while she showed the men where to go.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye; Sir Björn and our man are gone into the hills
with the sleigh—they are to see and bring home some
fodder we have stacked up there,” said Lady Aashild.
“And serving-woman I have none,” she said, laughing.</p>
<p class="c015">A little while after, the four young men were sitting
on the outer bench with their backs to the board, looking
at the old lady, as, busily but quietly, she went about
making ready their supper. She laid a cloth on the board,
and set on it a lighted candle; then brought forth butter,
cheese, a bear-ham and a high pile of thin slices of fine
bread. She fetched ale and mead up from the cellar
below the room, and then poured out the porridge into
a dish of fine wood, and bade them sit in to the board
and fall to.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis but little for you young folk,” she said laughing.
“I must boil another pot of porridge. To-morrow you
shall fare better—but I shut up the kitchen-house, in the
winter save when I bake or brew. We are few folks on
the farm, and I begin to grow old, kinsman.”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend laughed and shook his head. He had marked
that his men behaved before the old woman seemly and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_242">242</span>modestly as he had scarce ever seen them bear themselves
before.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are a strange woman, Moster. Mother was ten
years younger than you, and she looked older when last
we were in your house than you look to-day.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, Magnhild’s youth left her full early,” said Lady
Aashild softly. “Where are you come from, now?” she
asked after a while.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have been for a season at a farmstead up north in
Lesja,” said Erlend, “I had hired me lodging there. I
know not if you can guess what errand has brought me
to this countryside?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You would ask: know I that you have had suit made
to Lavrans Björgulfsön of Jörundgaard for his daughter?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Erlend. “I made suit for her in seemly
and honourable wise, and Lavrans Björgulfsön answered
with a churlish: no. Now see I no better way, since
Kristin and I will not be forced apart, than that I bear
her off by the strong hand. I have—I have had a spy
in this country-side, and I know that her mother was to
be at Sundbu at Clementsmass and for a while after, and
Lavrans is gone to Romsdal with the other men to fetch
across the winter stores to Sil.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild sat silent a while:</p>
<p class="c015">“That counsel, Erlend, you had best let be,” said she.
“I deem not either that the maid will go with you willingly;
and I trow you would not use force?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, but she will. We have spoken of it many times—she
has prayed me herself many times to bear her away.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin has—?” said Lady Aashild. Then she laughed:
“None the less I would not have you make too sure that
the maid will follow when you come to take her at her
word.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, but she will,” said Erlend. “And, Moster, my
thought was this: that you send word to Jörundgaard
and bid Kristin come and be your guest—a week or so,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_243">243</span>while her father and mother are from home. Then could
we be at Hamar before any knew she was gone,” he added.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild answered, still smiling:</p>
<p class="c015">“And had you thought as well what we should answer,
Sir Björn and I, when Lavrans comes and calls us to account
for his daughter.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Erlend. “We were four well-armed men
and the maid was willing.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I will not help you in this,” said the lady hotly. “Lavrans
has been a trusty man to us for many a year—he
and his wife are honourable folk, and I will not be art
or part in deceiving them or beshaming their child. Leave
the maid in peace, Erlend. ’Twill soon be high time,
too, that your kin should hear of other deeds of yours
than running in and out of the land with stolen women.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I must speak with you alone, lady,” said Erlend,
shortly.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild took a candle, led him to the closet, and
shut the door behind them. She sat herself down on a
corn-bin: Erlend stood with his hands thrust into his belt,
looking down at her.</p>
<p class="c015">“You may say this, too, to Lavrans Björgulfsön: that
Sira Jon of Gerdarud joined us in wedlock ere we went
on our way to Lady Ingebjörg Haakonsdatter in Sweden.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Say you so?” said Lady Aashild. “Are you well
assured that Lady Ingebjörg will welcome you, when you
come thither?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I spoke with her at Tunsberg,” said Erlend. “She
greeted me as her dear kinsman, and thanked me when I
proffered her my service either here or in Sweden. And
Munan hath promised me letters to her.”</p>
<p class="c015">“And know you not,” said Aashild, “that even should
you find a priest that will wed you, yet will Kristin have
cast away all right to the heritage of her father’s lands
and goods? Nor can her children be your lawful heirs.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_244">244</span>Much I doubt if she will be counted as your lawfully
wedded wife.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Not in this land, maybe. ’Tis therefore we fly to
Sweden. Her forefather, Laurentius Lagmand, was never
wed to the Lady Bengta in any other sort—they could never
win her brother’s consent. Yet was she counted as a
wedded lady—”</p>
<p class="c015">“There were no children,” said Aashild. “Think you
my sons will hold their hands from your heritage, if Kristin
be left a widow with children, and their lawful birth
can be cast in dispute?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You do Munan wrong,” said Erlend. “I know but
little of your other children—I know indeed that you
have little cause to judge them kindly. But Munan has
ever been my trusty kinsman. He is fain to have me
wed; ’twas he went to Lavrans with my wooing—Besides,
afterwards, by course of law, I can assure our
children their heritage and rights.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, and thereby mark their mother as your concubine,”
said Lady Aashild. “But ’tis past my understanding
how that meek and holy man, Jon Helgesön, will
dare to brave his Bishop by wedding you against the law.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I confessed—<i>all</i>—to him last summer,” said Erlend
in a low voice. “He promised then to wed us, if all other
ways should fail.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it even so?” said Lady Aashild, slowly—“A
heavy sin have you laid upon your soul, Erlend Nikulaussön.
’Twas well with Kristin at home with her father
and mother—a good marriage was agreed for her with
a comely and honourable man of good kindred—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin hath told me herself how you said once that
she and I would match well together. And that Simon
Andressön was no husband for her—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh—I have said, and I have said!” Aashild broke
in. “I have said so many things in my time—Neither
can I understand at all that you can have gained your
<span class="pageno" id="Page_245">245</span>will with Kristin so lightly. So many times you cannot
have met together. And never could I have thought that
maid had been so light to win—”</p>
<p class="c015">“We met at Oslo,” said Erlend. “Afterward she was
dwelling out at Gerdarud with her father’s brother. She
came out and met me in the woods.” He looked down
and spoke very low: “I had her alone to myself out
there—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild started up. Erlend bent his head yet
lower.</p>
<p class="c015">“And after that—she still was friends with you?” she
asked, unbelievingly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” Erlend smiled a weak, wavering smile. “We
were friends still. And ’twas not so bitterly against her—but
no blame lies on her. ’Twas then she would have had
me take her away—she was loth to go back to her kin—”</p>
<p class="c015">“But you would not?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No. I was minded to try to win her for my wife
with her father’s will.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it long since?” asked Lady Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas a year last Lawrencemass,” answered Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“You have not hasted overmuch with your wooing,”
said the other.</p>
<p class="c015">“She was not free before from her first betrothal.”</p>
<p class="c015">“And since then you have not come nigh her?” asked
Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">“We managed so that we met once and again.” Once
more the wavering smile flitted over the man’s face. “In
a house in the town.”</p>
<p class="c015">“In God’s name!” said Lady Aashild.—“I will help
you and her as best I may. I can see it well: not long
could Kristin bear to live there with her father and mother,
hiding such a thing as this.—Is there yet more?” she
asked of a sudden.</p>
<p class="c015">“Not that I have heard,” said Erlend shortly.</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you bethought you,” asked the lady in a while,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_246">246</span>“that Kristin has friends and kinsmen dwelling all down
the Dale?”</p>
<p class="c015">“We must journey as secretly as we can,” said Erlend.
“And therefore it behooves us to make no delay in setting
out, that we may be well on the way before her father
comes home. You must lend us your sleigh, Moster.”</p>
<p class="c015">Aashild shrugged her shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“Then is there her uncle at Skog—what if he hear that
you are holding your wedding with his brother’s daughter
at Gerdarud?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aasmund has spoken for me to Lavrans,” said Erlend.
“He would not be privy to our counsels, but ’tis like he
will wink an eye—we must come to the priest by night,
and journey onward by night. And afterward, I trow
well Aasmund will put it to Lavrans that it befits not a
God-fearing man like him to part them that a priest has
wedded—and that ’twill be best for him to give his consent,
that we may be lawful wedded man and wife. And
you must say the like to the man, Moster. He may set
what terms he will for atonement between us, and ask all
such amends as he deems just.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I trow Lavrans Björgulfsön will be no easy man to
guide in this matter,” said Lady Aashild. “And God and
St. Olav know, sister’s son, I like this business but ill.
But I see well ’tis the last way left you to make good the
harm you have wrought Kristin. To-morrow will I ride
myself to Jörundgaard, if so be you will lend me one of
your men, and I must get Ingrid of the croft above us here
to see to my cattle.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild came to Jörundgaard next evening just as
the moonlight was struggling with the last gleams of day.
She saw how pale and hollow-cheeked Kristin was, when
the girl came out into the courtyard to meet her guest.</p>
<p class="c015">The Lady sat by the fireplace playing with the two children.
Now and then she stole keen glances at Kristin, as
<span class="pageno" id="Page_247">247</span>she went about and set the supper-board. Thin she was
truly, and still in her bearing. She had ever been still,
but it was a stillness of another kind that was on the girl
now. Lady Aashild guessed at all the straining and the
stubborn defiance that lay behind.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis like you have heard,” said Kristin, coming over
to her, “what befell here this last autumn.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye—that my sister’s son has made suit for you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you,” asked Kristin, “how you said once he and
I would match well together? Only that he was too rich
and great of kin for me?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I hear that Lavrans is of another mind,” said the lady
drily.</p>
<p class="c015">There was a gleam in Kristin’s eyes, and she smiled a
little. She will do, no question, thought Lady Aashild.
Little as she liked it, she must hearken to Erlend, and give
the helping hand he had asked.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Kristin made ready her parents’ bed for the guest, and
Lady Aashild asked that the girl should sleep with her.
After they had lain down and the house was silent, Lady
Aashild brought forth her errand.</p>
<p class="c015">She grew strangely heavy at heart as she saw that this
child seemed to think not at all on the sorrow she would
bring on her father and mother. Yet <i>I</i> lived with Baard
for more than twenty years in sorrow and torment, she
thought. Well, maybe ’tis so with all of us. It seemed
Kristin had not even seen how Ulvhild had fallen away
this autumn—’tis little like, thought Aashild, that she will
see her little sister any more. But she said naught of
this—the longer Kristin could hold to this mood of wild
and reckless gladness, the better would it be, no doubt.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin rose up in the dark, and gathered together her
ornaments in a little box which she took with her into
the bed. Then Lady Aashild could not keep herself from
saying:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_248">248</span>“Yet methinks, Kristin, the best way of all would be
that Erlend ride hither, when your father comes home—that
he confess openly he hath done you a great wrong—and
put himself in Lavrans’ hands.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I trow that, then, father would kill Erlend,” said
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“That would not Lavrans, if Erlend refuse to draw
steel against his love’s father.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have no mind that Erlend should be humbled in
such wise,” said Kristin. “And I would not father should
know that Erlend had touched me, before he asked for me
in seemliness and honour.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you Lavrans will be less wroth,” asked Aashild,
“when he hears that you have fled from his house with
Erlend; and think you ’twill be a lighter sorrow for him
to bear? So long as you live with Erlend, and your
father has not given you to him, you can be naught but
his paramour before the law.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis another thing,” said Kristin, “if I be Erlend’s
paramour after he has tried in vain to win me for his
lawful wife.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild was silent. She thought of her meeting
with Lavrans Björgulfsön when he came home and learnt
that his daughter had been stolen away.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Kristin said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see well, Lady Aashild, I seem to you an evil, thankless
child. But so has it been in this house ever since
father came from the Haugathing, that every day has been
a torment to him and to me. ’Tis best for all that there
be an end of this matter.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They rode from Jörundgaard betimes the next day, and
came to Haugen a little after nones. Erlend met them
in the courtyard, and Kristin threw herself into his arms,
paying no heed to the man who was with her and Lady
Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_249">249</span>In the house she greeted Björn Gunnarsön; and then
greeted Erlend’s two men, as though she knew them well
already. Lady Aashild could see no sign in her of bashfulness
or fear. And after, when they sat at the board,
and Erlend set forth his plan, Kristin put her word in
with the others and gave counsel about the journey: that
they should ride forth from Haugen next evening so late
that they should come to the gorge when the moon
was setting, and should pass in the dark through Sil to
beyond Loptsgaard, thence up along the Otta stream to
the bridge, and from thence along the west side of the
Otta and the Laagen over bypaths through the waste as
far as the horses could bear them. They must lie resting
through the day at one of the empty spring sæters on
the hillside there; “for till we are out of the Holledis
country there is ever fear that we may come upon folk
that know me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you thought of fodder for the horses?” said Aashild.
“You cannot rob folks’ sæter in a year like this—even
if so be there is fodder there—and you know none
in all the Dale has fodder to sell this year.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have thought of that,” answered Kristin. “You must
lend us three days’ food and fodder. ’Tis a reason the
more why we must not journey in so strong a troop.—Erlend
must send Jon back to Husaby. The year has
been better on the Trondheim side, and surely some loads
can be got across the hills before the Yule-tide snows.
There are some poor folk dwelling southward in the parish,
Lady Aashild, that I would fain you should help with
a gift of fodder for Erlend and me.”</p>
<p class="c015">Björn set up an uncanny, mirthless horse-laugh. Lady
Aashild shook her head. But Erlend’s man Ulv lifted
his keen, swarthy visage and looked at Kristin with his
bold smile:</p>
<p class="c015">“At Husaby there is never abundance, Kristin Lavransdatter,
neither in good years nor in bad. But maybe
<span class="pageno" id="Page_250">250</span>things will be changed when you come to be mistress
there. By your speech a man would deem you are the
housewife that Erlend needs.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin nodded to the man calmly, and went on. They
must keep clear of the high-road as far as might be. And
she deemed it not wise to take the way that led through
Hamar. But, Erlend put in, Munan was there—and the
letter to the Duchess they must have.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then Ulv must part from us at Fagaberg and ride
to Sir Munan, while we hold on west of Mjösen and make
our way by Land and the by-roads through Hadeland down
to Hakedal. Thence there goes a waste way south to Magretadal,
I have heard my uncle say. ’Twere not wise
for us to pass through Raumarike in these days, when a
great wedding-feast is toward at Dyfrin,” she said with a
smile.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend went round and laid his arm about her shoulders,
and she leaned back to him, paying no heed to the
others who sat by looking on. Lady Aashild said angrily:</p>
<p class="c015">“None would believe aught else than that you are well-used
to running away”; and Sir Björn broke again into
his horse-laugh.</p>
<p class="c015">In a little while Lady Aashild stood up to go to the
kitchen-house and see to the food. She had made up the
kitchen fire so that Erlend’s men could sleep there at
night. She bade Kristin go with her: “for I must be able
to swear to Lavrans Björgulfsön that you were never a
moment alone together in my house,” she said wrathfully.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin laughed and went with the Lady. Soon after,
Erlend came strolling in after them, drew a stool forward
to the hearth, and sat there hindering the women in
their work. He caught hold of Kristin every time she
came nigh him, as she hurried about her work. At last
he drew her down on his knee:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis even as Ulv said, I trow; you are the housewife
I need.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_251">251</span>“Aye, aye,” said Aashild, with a vexed laugh. “She
will serve your turn well enough. ’Tis she that stakes all
in this adventure—you hazard not much.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You speak truth,” said Erlend. “But I wot well I
have shown I had the will to come to her by the right
road. Be not so angry, Moster Aashild.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I do well to be angry,” said the lady. “Scarce have
you set your house in order, but you must needs guide
things so that you have to run from it all again with a
woman.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You must bear in mind, kinswoman—so hath it ever
been, that ’twas not the worst men who fell into trouble
for a woman’s sake—all sagas tell us that.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, God help us all!” said Aashild. Her face grew
young and soft. “That tale have I heard before, Erlend,”
she laid her hand on his head and gave his hair a little
tug.</p>
<p class="c015">At that moment Ulv Haldorson tore open the door, and
shut it quickly behind him:</p>
<p class="c015">“Here is come yet another guest, Erlend—the one you
are least fain to see, I trow.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it Lavrans Björgulfsön?” said Erlend starting up.</p>
<p class="c015">“Well if it were,” said the man. “’Tis Eline Ormsdatter.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The door was opened from without; the woman who
came in thrust Ulv aside and came forward into the light.
Kristin looked at Erlend; at first he seemed to shrivel
and shrink together; then he drew himself up, with a dark
flush on his face:</p>
<p class="c015">“In the devil’s name, where come you from—what would
you here?”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild stepped forward and spoke:</p>
<p class="c015">“You must come with us to the hall, Eline Ormsdatter.
So much manners at least we have in this house, that we
welcome not our guests in the kitchen.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_252">252</span>“I look not, Lady Aashild,” said the other, “to be welcomed
as a guest by Erlend’s kinsfolk—Asked you from
whence I came?—I come from Husaby, as you might
know, I bear you greetings from Orm and Margret; they
are well.”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend made no answer.</p>
<p class="c015">“When I heard that you had had Gissur Arnfinsön raise
money for you, and that you were for the south again,”
she went on, “I thought ’twas like you would bide a
while this time with your kinsfolk in Gudbrandsdal. I
knew that you had made suit for the daughter of a neighbour
of theirs.”</p>
<p class="c015">She looked across at Kristin for the first time, and met
the girl’s eyes. Kristin was very pale, but she looked
calmly and keenly at the other.</p>
<p class="c015">She was stony-calm. She had known it from the moment
she heard who was come—this was the thought she
had been fleeing from always; this thought it was she
had tried to smother under impatience, restlessness and
defiance; the whole time she had been striving not to think
whether Erlend had freed himself wholly and fully from
his former paramour. Now she was overtaken—useless to
struggle any more. But she begged not nor beseeched for
herself.</p>
<p class="c015">She saw that Eline Ormsdatter was fair. She was young
no longer; but she was fair—once she must have been
exceeding fair. She had thrown back her hood; her head
was round as a ball, and hard; the cheekbones stood
out—but none the less it was plain to see—once she had
been very fair. Her coif covered but the back part of
her head; while she was speaking, her hands kept smoothing
the waving, bright-gold front-hair beneath the linen.
Kristin had never seen a woman with such great eyes;
they were dark brown, round and hard; but under the
narrow coal-black eyebrows and the long lashes they were
strangely beautiful against her golden hair. The skin
<span class="pageno" id="Page_253">253</span>of her cheeks and lips was chafed and raw from her ride
in the cold, but it could not spoil her much; she was too
fair for that. The heavy riding-dress covered up her form,
but she bore herself in it as does only a woman most
proud and secure in the glory of a fair body. She was
scarce as tall as Kristin; but she held herself so well that
she seemed yet taller than the slender, spare-limbed
girl.</p>
<p class="c015">“Hath she been with you at Husaby the whole time?”
asked Kristin in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“I have not been at Husaby,” said Erlend curtly, flushing
red again. “I have dwelt at Hestnæs the most of the
summer.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Here now are the tidings I came to bring you, Erlend,”
said Eline. “You need not any longer take shelter with
your kinsfolk and try their hospitality for that I am keeping
your house. Since this autumn I have been a widow.”
Erlend stood motionless.</p>
<p class="c015">“It was not I that bade you come to Husaby last year,
to keep my house,” said he with effort.</p>
<p class="c015">“I heard that all things were going to waste there,”
said Eline. “I had so much kindness left for you from old
days Erlend, that methought I should lend a hand to help
you—although God knows you have not dealt well with
our children or with me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“For the children I have done what I could,” said Erlend.
“And well you know, ’twas for their sake I suffered
you to live on at Husaby. That you profited them or
me by it you scarce can think yourself, I trow,” he
added, smiling scornfully. “Gissur could guide things well
enough without your help.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, you have ever had such mighty trust in Gissur,”
said Eline, laughing softly. “But now the thing is this,
Erlend now I am free. And if so be you will, you can
keep the promise now you made me once.”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend stood silent.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_254">254</span>“Mind you,” asked Eline, “the night I bore your son?
You promised then that you would wed me when Sigurd
died.”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend passed his hand up under his hair, that hung
damp with sweat.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,—I remember,” he said.</p>
<p class="c015">“Will you keep that promise now?” asked Eline.</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">Eline Ormsdatter looked across at Kristin—then smiled
a little and nodded. Then she looked again at Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“It is ten years since, Eline,” said the man. “And
since that time you and I have lived together year in year
out like two damned souls in Hell.”</p>
<p class="c015">“But not only so, I trow!” said she with the same smile.</p>
<p class="c015">“It is years and years since aught else has been,”
said Erlend dully. “The children would be none the
better off. And you know—you know I can scarce
bear to be in a room with you any more!” he almost
screamed.</p>
<p class="c015">“I marked naught of that when you were at home in
the summer,” said Eline with a meaning smile. “Then
we were not unfriends—always.”</p>
<p class="c015">“If you deem that we were friends, have it as you will,
for me,” said Erlend wearily.</p>
<p class="c015">“Will you stand here without end?” broke in Lady
Aashild. She poured the porridge from the pot into two
great wooden dishes and gave one to Kristin. The girl
took it. “Bear it to the hall—and you, Ulv, take the other—and
set them on the board; supper we must have, whether
it be so, or so.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin and the man went out with the dishes. Lady
Aashild said to the two others:</p>
<p class="c015">“Come now, you too; what boots it that you stand here
barking at each other.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis best that Eline and I have our talk out together
now,” said Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_255">255</span>Lady Aashild said no more, but went out and left
them.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">In the hall Kristin had laid the table and fetched ale
from the cellar. She sat on the outer bench, straight as a
wand and calm of face, but she ate nothing. Nor had
the others much stomach to their food, neither Björn nor
Erlend’s men. Only the man that had come with Eline
and Björn’s hired man ate greedily. Lady Aashild sat
herself down and ate a little of the porridge. No one
spoke a word.</p>
<p class="c015">At length Eline Ormsdatter came in alone. Lady Aashild
bade her sit between Kristin and herself; Eline sat down
and ate a little. Now and again a gleam as of a hidden
smile flitted across her face, and she stole a glance at
Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">A while after Lady Aashild went out to the kitchen-house.</p>
<p class="c015">The fire on the hearth was almost burnt out. Erlend
sat by it on his stool, crouched together, his head down
between his arms.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild went to him and laid her hand on his
shoulder:</p>
<p class="c015">“God forgive you, Erlend, that you have brought things
to this pass—”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend turned up to her a face besmeared with wretchedness:</p>
<p class="c015">“She is with child,” he said, and shut his eyes.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild’s face flamed up, she gripped his shoulder
hard:</p>
<p class="c015">“Which of them?” she asked, roughly and scornfully.</p>
<p class="c015">“My child it is not,” said Erlend, in the same dead
voice. “But like enough you will not believe me—none
will believe me—” he sank together again.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild sat down in front of him on the edge of
the hearth:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_256">256</span>“Now must you try to play the man, Erlend. ’Tis not
so easy to believe you in this matter. Do you swear it
is not yours?”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend lifted his ravaged face:</p>
<p class="c015">“As surely as I needed God’s mercy—as surely as I hope—that
God in Heaven has comforted mother for all she
suffered here—I have not touched Eline since first I saw
Kristin!” He cried out the words, so that Lady Aashild
had to hush him.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then I see not that this is so great a misfortune. You
must find out who the father is, and make it worth his
while to wed her.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis in my mind that it is Gissur Arnfinsön—my steward
at Husaby,” said Erlend wearily. “We talked together
last year—and since then too—Sigurd’s death has
been looked for this long time past. He was willing to
wed her, when she was a widow, if I would give her a
fitting portion—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Well?” said Lady Aashild. Erlend went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“She swears with great oaths she will have none of him.
She will name me as the father. And if I swear I am not—think
you any will believe aught but that I am forsworn—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You must sure be able to turn her purpose,” said
Lady Aashild. “There is no other way now but that you go
home with her to Husaby no later than to-morrow. And
there must you harden your heart and stand firm till you
have this marriage fixed between your steward and Eline.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Erlend. Then he threw himself forward
again and groaned aloud:</p>
<p class="c015">“Can you not see—Moster—what think you Kristin will
believe—?”</p>
<p class="c015">At night Erlend lay in the kitchen-house with the men.
In the hall Kristin slept with Lady Aashild in the Lady’s
bed, and Eline Ormsdatter in the other bed that was
there. Björn went out and lay in the stable.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_257">257</span>The next morning Kristin went out with Lady Aashild to
the byre. While the lady went to the kitchen to make
ready the breakfast, Kristin bore the milk up to the hall.</p>
<p class="c015">A candle stood burning on the table. Eline was sitting
dressed on the edge of her bed. Kristin greeted her
silently, then fetched a milk-pan and poured the milk into
it.</p>
<p class="c015">“Will you give me a drink of milk?” asked Eline.
Kristin took a wooden ladle, filled it and handed it to
the other; she drank eagerly, looking at Kristin over the
rim of the cup.</p>
<p class="c015">“So you are that Kristin Lavransdatter, that hath stolen
from me Erlend’s love,” she said as she gave back the
ladle.</p>
<p class="c015">“You should know best if there was any love to steal,”
said the girl.</p>
<p class="c015">Eline bit her lip.</p>
<p class="c015">“What will <i>you</i> do,” she said, “if Erlend one day grow
weary of you, and offer to wed you to his serving-man?
Will you do his will in that as well?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin made no answer. Then the other laughed, and
said:</p>
<p class="c015">“You do his will in all things now, I well believe.
What think you, Kristin—shall we throw dice for our
man, we two paramours of Erlend Nikulaussön?” When
no answer came, she laughed again and said: “Are you
so simple, that you deny not you are his paramour?”</p>
<p class="c015">“To you I care not to lie,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould profit you but little if you did,” answered
Eline, still laughing. “I know the boy too well. He flew
at you like a black-cock, I trow, the second time you were
together. ’Tis pity of you too, fair child that you are.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s cheeks grew white. Sick with loathing, she
said low:</p>
<p class="c015">“I will not speak with you—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you he is like to deal with you better than with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_258">258</span>me,” went on Eline. Then Kristin answered sharply:</p>
<p class="c015">“No blame will I ever cast on Erlend, whatever he may
do. I went astray of my own will—I shall not whimper
or wail if the path lead out on to the rocks—”</p>
<p class="c015">Eline was silent for a while. Then she said unsteadily,
flushing red:</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>I</i> was a maid too, when he came to me Kristin—even
though I had been wife in name to the old man for seven
years. But like enough you could never understand what
the misery of that life was.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin began to tremble violently. Eline looked at
her. Then from her travelling-case that stood by her on
the step of the bed, she took a little horn. She broke
the seal that was on its mouth and said softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“You are young and I am old, Kristin. I know well
it boots not for me to strive against you—your time is
now. Will you drink with me, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin did not move. Then the other raised the horn
to her own lips; but Kristin marked that she did not
drink. Eline said:</p>
<p class="c015">“So much honour you sure can do me, to drink to me—and
promise you will not be a hard step-mother to my
children?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin took the horn. At that moment Erlend opened
the door. He stood a moment, looking from one to the
other of the women.</p>
<p class="c015">“What is this?” he asked.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin answered, and her voice was wild and piercing:</p>
<p class="c015">“We are drinking to each other—we—your paramours—”</p>
<p class="c015">He gripped her wrist and took the horn from her.</p>
<p class="c015">“Be still,” he said, harshly. “You shall not drink
with her.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Why not?” cried Kristin as before. “She was pure
as I was, when you tempted her—”</p>
<p class="c015">“That hath she said so often, that I trow she is come
<span class="pageno" id="Page_259">259</span>to believe it herself,” said Erlend. “Mind you, Eline,
when you made me go to Sigurd with that tale, and
he brought forth witness that he had caught you before
with another man?”</p>
<p class="c015">White with loathing, Kristin turned away. Eline had
flushed darkly—now she said, defiantly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet will it scarce bring leprosy on the girl, if she
drink with me!”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend turned on Eline in wrath—then of a sudden
his face seemed to grow long and hard as stone, and he
gasped with horror:</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus!” he said below his breath. He gripped Eline
by the arm:</p>
<p class="c015">“Drink to <i>her</i> then,” he said in a harsh and quivering
voice. “Drink you first; then she shall drink to you.”</p>
<p class="c015">Eline wrenched herself away with a groan. She fled
backwards through the room, the man after her.
“Drink,” he said. He snatched the dagger from his belt
and held it as he followed. “Drink out the drink you
have brewed for Kristin!” He seized Eline’s arm again
and dragged her to the table, then forced her head forward
toward the horn.</p>
<p class="c015">Eline shrieked once and buried her face on her arm.
Erlend released her and stood trembling.</p>
<p class="c015">“A hell was mine with Sigurd,” shrieked Eline. “You—you
promised—but you have been worst to me of all,
Erlend!”</p>
<p class="c015">Then came Kristin forward and grasped the horn:</p>
<p class="c015">“One of us two must drink—both of us you cannot
keep—”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend wrenched the horn from her and flung her
from him so that she reeled and fell near by Lady Aashild’s
bed. Again he pushed the horn against Eline Ormsdatter’s
mouth—with one knee on the bench he stood by her
side, and with a hand round her head tried to force the
drink between her teeth.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_260">260</span>She reached out under his arm, snatched his dagger
from the table, and struck hard at the man. The blow
did but scratch his flesh through the clothes. Then she
turned the point against her own breast, and the instant
after sank sidelong down into his arms.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin rose and came to them. Erlend was holding
Eline, her head hanging back over his arm. The rattle
came in her throat almost at once—blood welled up and
ran out of her mouth. She spat some of it out and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twas for you I meant—that drink—for all the times—you
deceived me—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Bring Lady Aashild hither,” said Erlend in a low
voice. Kristin stood immovable.</p>
<p class="c015">“She is dying,” said Erlend as before.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then is she better served than we,” said Kristen. Erlend
looked at her—the despair in his eyes softened her.
She left the room.</p>
<p class="c015">“What is it?” asked Lady Aashild, when Kristin called
her out from the kitchen.</p>
<p class="c015">“We have killed Eline Ormsdatter,” said Kristin. “She
is dying—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild set off running to the hall. But Eline
breathed her last as the Lady crossed the threshold.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild had laid out the dead woman on the
bench, wiped the blood from her face and covered it
with the linen of her coif. Erlend stood leaning against
the wall, behind the body.</p>
<p class="c015">“Know you,” said Aashild, “that this was the worst
thing that could befall?”</p>
<p class="c015">She had filled the fireplace with twigs and firewood;
now she thrust the horn into the midst of them and blew
them into a blaze.</p>
<p class="c015">“Can you trust your men?” asked the Lady again.</p>
<p class="c015">“Ulv and Haftor are trusty, methinks—of Jon and the
man with Eline I know but little.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_261">261</span>“You know, belike,” said the lady, “should it come
out that Kristin and you were together here, and that you
two were alone with her when she died, ’twere as well
for Kristin you had let her drink of Eline’s brew—And
should there be talk of poison, all men will call to mind
what once was laid to <i>my</i> charge.—Had she any kindred
or friends?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Erlend in a low voice. “She had none but
me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet,” said Lady Aashild again, “it may well be a hard
matter to cover up this thing and hide the body away,
without the ugliest of misthought falling on you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“She shall rest in hallowed ground,” said Erlend, “if it
cost me Husaby. What say you Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin nodded.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild sat silent. The more she thought, the
more hopeless it seemed to her to find any way out. In the
kitchen-house were four men—even if Erlend could bribe
them all to keep silence, even if some of them, if Eline’s
man, could be bribed to leave the country—still, sure
they could never be. And ’twas known at Jörundgaard
that Kristin had been here—if Lavrans heard of this,
she feared to think what he would do. And how to bear
the dead woman hence. The mountain path to the west
was not to be thought of now—there was the road to
Romsdal, or over the hills to Trondheim, or south down
the Dale. And should the truth come out, it would never
be believed—even if folk let it pass for true.</p>
<p class="c015">“I must take counsel with Björn in this matter,” she
said, and rose and went out to call him.</p>
<p class="c015">Björn Gunnarsön listened to his wife’s story without
moving a muscle and without withdrawing his eyes from
Erlend’s face.</p>
<p class="c015">“Björn,” said Aashild desperately. “There is naught
for it but that one must swear he saw her lay hands upon
herself.”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_262">262</span>Björn’s dead eyes grew slowly dark, as life came into
them; he looked at his wife, and his mouth drew aside
into a crooked smile:</p>
<p class="c015">“And you mean that I should be the one?”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild crushed her hands together and lifted
them towards him:</p>
<p class="c015">“Björn, you know well what it means for these two—”</p>
<p class="c015">“And you think that, whether or no, ’tis all over with
me?” he said slowly. “Or think you there is so much
left of the man I once was that I dare be forsworn to
save that boy there from going down to ruin? I that was
dragged down myself—all those years ago. Dragged
down, I say,” he repeated.</p>
<p class="c015">“You say it because I am old now,” whispered Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin burst out into such weeping that the piercing
sound filled the room. She had sat in the corner by Aashild’s
bed, stark and silent. Now she began weeping wildly
and loud. It was as though Lady Aashild’s voice had
torn her heart open. The voice had been heavy with the
memories of the sweetness of love; it was as though its
sound had made her understand for the first time what
her love and Erlend’s had been. The memory of hot
and passionate happiness swept over all else—swept
away the hard despair and hatred of last night. All
she knew of now was her love and her will to hold
out.</p>
<p class="c015">They looked at her—all three. Then Sir Björn went
across and lifted her chin with his hand and looked at
her:</p>
<p class="c015">“Say <i>you</i>, Kristin, she did it herself?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Every word you have heard is true,” said Kristin
firmly. “We threatened her till she did it.”</p>
<p class="c015">“She had meant Kristin should suffer a worst fate,”
said Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Björn let go the girl. He went over to the body,
lifted it up into the bed where Eline had lain the night
<span class="pageno" id="Page_263">263</span>before, and laid it close to the wall, drawing up the coverings
well over it:</p>
<p class="c015">“Jon and the man you do not know you must send home
to Husaby, with word that Eline is journeying south with
you. Let them ride at midday. Say that the women are
asleep in the hall; they must take their food in the kitchen.
Afterward you must speak with Ulv and Haftor. Hath
she threatened before to do this? So that you can bring
witness to it, if such question should be asked?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Every soul that was at Husaby the last years we lived
together there,” said Erlend wearily, “can witness that
she threatened to take her own life—and mine too sometimes—when
I spoke of parting from her.”</p>
<p class="c015">Björn laughed harshly:</p>
<p class="c015">“I thought as much. To-night we must clothe her in
her riding-coats and set her in the sleigh. You must sit
beside her—”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend swayed on his feet where he stood:</p>
<p class="c015">“I cannot!”</p>
<p class="c015">“God knows how much manhood will be left in <i>you</i>
when you have gone your own gait twenty years more,”
said Björn. “Think you, then, you can drive the sleigh?
For then will I sit beside her. We must travel by night
and by lonely paths, till we are come down to Fron. In this
cold none can know how long she has been dead. We
will drive in to the monk’s Hospice at Roaldstad. There
will you and I bear witness that you two were together
in the sleigh, and it came to bitter words betwixt you.
There is witness enough that you would not live with her
since the ban was taken off you, and that you have made
suit for a maiden of birth that fits your own. Ulv and
Haftor must hold themselves aloof the whole way, so they
can swear, if need be, she was alive when last they saw
her. You can bring them to do so much, I trow? At the
monastery you can have the monks lay her in her coffin—and
afterward you must bargain with the priests for grave-peace
<span class="pageno" id="Page_264">264</span>for her and soul’s peace for yourself.—Aye, a fair
deed it is not? But so as you have guided things, no
fairer can it be. Stand not there like a breeding woman
ready to swoon away. God help you, boy, a man can see
<i>you</i> have not proved before what ’tis to feel the knife-edge
at your throat.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">A biting blast came rushing down from the mountains,
driving a fine silvery smoke from the snow-wreaths up into
the moon-blue air, as the men made ready to drive
away.</p>
<p class="c015">Two horses were harnessed, one in front of the other.
Erlend sat in the front of the sleigh. Kristin went up to
him:</p>
<p class="c015">“This time, Erlend, you must try to send me word how
this journey goes, and what becomes of you after.”</p>
<p class="c015">He crushed her hand till she thought the blood must
be driven out from under the nails.</p>
<p class="c015">“Dare you still hold fast to me, Kristin?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, still,” she said; and after a moment—: “Of
this deed we are both guilty—I egged you on—for I
willed her death.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild and Kristin stood and looked after the
sleigh, as it rose and dipped over the snow-drifts. It
went down from sight into a hollow—then came forth
again farther down on a snow-slope. And then the men
passed into the shadow of a fell, and were gone from
sight for good.</p>
<p class="c015">The two women sat by the fireplace, their backs to the
empty bed, from which Aashild had borne away all the
bedding and straw. Both could feel it standing there
empty and gaping behind them.</p>
<p class="c015">“Would you rather that we should sleep in the kitchen-house
to-night,” asked Lady Aashild at length.</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis like it will be the same wherever we lie,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_265">265</span>Lady Aashild went out to look at the weather.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, should the wind get up or a thaw come on, they
will not journey far before it comes out,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“Here at Haugen it blows ever,” answered Lady Aashild.
“’Tis no sign of a change of weather.”</p>
<p class="c015">They sat on as before.</p>
<p class="c015">“You should not forget,” said the Lady at last, “what
fate she had meant for you two.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin answered low:</p>
<p class="c015">“I was thinking, maybe in her place I had willed the
same.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Never would you have willed another should be a
leper,” said Aashild, vehemently.</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you, Moster, you said to me once that ’tis well
when we dare not do a thing we think is not good and fair;
but not so well when we think a thing not good and fair
because we dare not do it?”</p>
<p class="c015">“You had not dared to do it, because ’twas sin,” said
Lady Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">“No, I believe not so,” said Kristin. “Much have I
done already that I deemed once I dared not to do because
’twas sin. But I saw not till now what sin brings
with it—that we must tread others underfoot.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Erlend would fain have made an end of his ill life long
before he met you,” said Aashild eagerly. “All was over
between those two.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know it,” said Kristin. “But I trow she had never
cause to deem Erlend’s purposes so firm that she could not
shake them.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin,” begged the lady fearfully, “surely you would
not give up Erlend now? You cannot be saved now except
you save each other.”</p>
<p class="c015">“So would a priest scorn counsel,” said Kristin, smiling
coldly. “But well I know that never can I give up Erlend
now—not if I should tread my own father underfoot.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild rose:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_266">266</span>“We had as well put our hands to some work as sit
here thus,” she said. “Like enough ’twould be vain for us
to try to sleep.”</p>
<p class="c015">She fetched the butter-churn from the closet, then
bore in some pans of milk, filled the churn and made
ready to begin churning.</p>
<p class="c015">“Let me do it,” Kristin asked. “My back is younger.”</p>
<p class="c015">They worked without speaking; Kristin stood by the
closet-door churning, while Aashild carded wool by the
hearth. At last, when Kristin had emptied the churn and
was kneading the butter, the girl asked of a sudden:</p>
<p class="c015">“Moster Aashild—are you never afraid of the day
when you must stand before God’s judgment?”</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild rose, and came and stood before Kristin
in the light:</p>
<p class="c015">“It may be I shall find courage to ask Him that hath
made me as I am, if He will have mercy on me in His
own good time. For I have never begged for His mercy
when I broke His commands. And never have I begged
God or man to forgive me a farthing of the price I have
paid here in this mountain hut.”</p>
<p class="c015">A little while after she said softly:</p>
<p class="c015">“Munan, my eldest son, was twenty years old. He
was not such an one then, as I know he is now. They
were not such ones then, my children—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin answered low:</p>
<p class="c015">“But yet have you had Sir Björn by your side each day
and each night in all these years.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye—that too have I had,” said Aashild.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">In a little while after, Kristin was done with the butter-making.
Lady Aashild said then that they must lie
down and try to sleep a little.</p>
<p class="c015">Inside, in the dark bed, she laid her arm round Kristin’s
shoulders, and drew the young head in to her breast.
And it was not long before she heard by her even gentle
breathing that Kristin was fallen asleep.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<div>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_267">267</span>
<h3 class="c013">4</h3>
</div>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">The frost held on. In every byre in the parish the half-starved
beasts bellowed dolefully with hunger and cold.
Already the farmers were skimping and saving on their
fodder, every straw they could.</p>
<p class="c015">There was little visiting round at Yule this year; folks
stayed quiet in their own homes.</p>
<p class="c015">During Yule-tide the cold grew greater—it was as
though each day was colder than the last. Scarce anyone
could call to mind so hard a winter—there came no more
snow, not even up in the mountains; but the snow that had
fallen at Clementsmass froze hard as a stone. The sun
shone from a clear sky, now the days began to grow
lighter. At night the northern lights flickered and flamed
above the range to the north—they flamed over half the
heaven, but they brought no change of weather; now and
again would come a cloudy day, and a little dry snow
would sprinkle down—and then came clear weather again
and biting cold. The Laagen muttered and gurgled sluggishly
under its ice-bridges.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought each morning that she could bear no
more, that she could never hold out to the day’s end.
For each day she felt was as a duel between her and her
father. And <i>could</i> they be against each other so, when
every living being in the parish, man and beast, was
suffering under one common trial?—But still, when the
evening came, she had held out one day more.</p>
<p class="c015">It was not that her father was unfriendly. They spoke
no word of what was between them, but she felt, behind
all that he did not say, his firm unbending will to hold
fast to his denial.</p>
<p class="c015">And her heart ached within her for the lack of his
friendship. The ache was so dreadful in its keenness,
because she knew how much else her father had on his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_268">268</span>shoulders—and had things been as before, he would have
talked with her of it all—It was indeed so, that at
Jörundgaard they were in better case than most other
places; but here, too, they felt the pinch of the year each
day and each hour. Other years it had been Lavrans’
wont in the winters to handle and break in his young
colts; but this year he had sent them all south in the
autumn and sold them. And his daughter missed the
sound of his voice out in the courtyard, and the sight of
him struggling with the slender, ragged two-year-olds in the
game he loved so well. Storehouses and barns and bins
at Jörundgaard were not bare yet—there was store left
from the harvest of the year before—but many folk
came to ask for help—to buy, or to beg for gifts—and
none ever asked in vain.</p>
<p class="c015">Late one evening came a huge old skin-clad man on
ski. Lavrans talked with him out in the courtyard, and
Halvdan bore food across to the hearth-room for him.
None on the place who had seen him knew who he was—he
might well be one of those wild folk who lived far in
among the fells; like enough Lavrans had come upon
him in there. But Lavrans said naught of the visitor,
nor Halvdan either.</p>
<p class="c015">But one evening came a man whom Lavrans Björgulfsön
had been at odds with for many years. Lavrans
went to the storeroom with him. When he came back
to the hall again he said:</p>
<p class="c015">“They come to me for help, every man of them. But
here in my own house you are all against me. You, too,
wife,” he said hotly.</p>
<p class="c015">The mother flamed up at Kristin:</p>
<p class="c015">“Hear you what your father says to me! No, I am
not against you, Lavrans. I know—and I wot well you
know it too, Kristin—what befell away south at Roaldstad
late in the autumn, when he journeyed down the
Dale with that other adulterer, his kinsman of Hauges—she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_269">269</span>took her own life, the unhappy woman he had
lured away from all her kin.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood with a hard, frozen face:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see that ’tis all one—you blame him as much for
the years he has striven to free himself from sin, as for
the years he lived in it.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus, Maria!” cried Ragnfrid, clasping her hands
together: “What is come to you! Has even this not
availed to change your heart?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said Kristin. “I have not changed.”</p>
<p class="c015">Then Lavrans looked up from the bench where he sat
by Ulvhild:</p>
<p class="c015">“Neither have I changed, Kristin,” he said in a low
voice.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">But Kristin felt within her that in a manner she was
changed, in thoughts if not in heart. She had had tidings
of how it had fared with them on that dreadful journey.
As things fell out it had gone off more easily than
they looked it should. Whether the cold had got into
the hurt or whatever the cause might be, the knife-wound
in Erlend’s breast had festered, and constrained him to
lie sick some while in the hospice at Roaldstad, Sir Björn
tending him. But that Erlend was wounded made it
easier to win belief for their tale of how that other thing
had befallen.</p>
<p class="c015">When he was fit to journey on, he had taken the dead woman
with him in a coffin all the way to Oslo. There, by
Sira Jon’s help, he had won for her Christian burial in
the churchyard of the old Church of St. Nikolaus that
had been pulled down. Then had he made confession to
the Bishop of Oslo himself, and the Bishop had laid on
him as penance to go on pilgrimage to the Holy Blood at
Schwerin. Now was he gone out of the land.</p>
<p class="c015"><i>She</i> could not make pilgrimage to any place on earth,
and find absolution. For her there was naught but to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_270">270</span>sit here and wait and think, and strive to hold out in
the struggle with her father and mother. A strange
wintery-cold light fell on all her memories of meetings
with Erlend. She thought of his vehemency—in love
and in grief—and it was borne in on her that had she
been able, like him, to take up all things of a sudden,
and straightway rush forward with them, headlong, afterwards
maybe they might have seemed less fearful and
heavy to bear. At times, too, she would think: maybe
Erlend will give me up. It seemed to her she must always
have had a little, lurking fear that if things grew
too hard for them he would fail her. But she would
never give <i>him</i> up, unless he himself loosed her from
all vows.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">So the winter dragged on toward its end. And Kristin
could not cheat herself any more; she had to see that
the hardest trial of all lay before them—that Ulvhild
had not long to live. And in the midst of her bitter
sorrow for her sister she saw with horror that truly her
own soul was wildered and eaten away with sin. For,
with the dying child and the parents’ unspeakable sorrow
before her eyes, she was still brooding on this one
thing—if Ulvhild dies, how can I bear to look at my
father and not throw myself at his feet and confess all
and beseech him to forgive me—and command me—.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They were come far on in the long fast. Folks had
begun slaughtering the small stock they had hoped to
save alive, for fear they should die of themselves. And
the people themselves sickened and pined from living on
fish, with naught besides but a little wretched meal and
flour. Sira Eirik gave leave to the whole parish to eat
milk food if they would. But few of the folk could come
by a drop of milk.</p>
<p class="c015">Ulvhild lay in bed. She lay alone in the sisters’ bed,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_271">271</span>and someone watched by her each night. It chanced
sometimes that both Kristin and her father would be sitting
by her. On such a night Lavrans said to his daughter:</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you what Brother Edwin said that time about
Ulvhild’s lot? Even then the thought came to me that maybe
he meant this. But I thrust it from me then.”</p>
<p class="c015">Sometimes in these nights he would speak of this thing
and that from the time when the children were small.
Kristin sat there, white and desperate—she knew that behind
the words her father was beseeching her.</p>
<p class="c015">One day Lavrans had gone with Kolbein to hunt out a
bear’s winter lair in the wooded hills to the north. They
came home with a she-bear on a sledge, and Lavrans
brought with him a living bear-cub in the bosom of his
coat. Ulvhild brightened a little when he showed it to her.
But Ragnfrid said that was surely no time to rear up such
a beast—what would he do with it at a time like this?</p>
<p class="c015">“I will rear it up and bind it before my daughters’
bower,” said Lavrans, laughing harshly.</p>
<p class="c015">But they could not get for the cub the rich milk it needed,
and Lavrans had to kill it a few days after.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The sun had gained so much strength now that sometimes,
at midday, the roofs would drip a little. The
titmice clambered about, clinging on the sunny side of
the timber walls, and pecked till the wood rang, digging
for the flies sleeping in the cracks. Over the rolling
fields around, the snow shone hard and bright as silver.</p>
<p class="c015">At last one evening clouds began to draw together
over the moon. And the next morning the folks at
Jörundgaard woke in the midst of a whirling world of
snow that shut in their sight on every hand.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">That day they knew that Ulvhild was dying.</p>
<p class="c015">All the house-folk were indoors, and Sira Eirik came
<span class="pageno" id="Page_272">272</span>over to them. Many candles were burning in the hall.
Early in the evening Ulvhild passed away, quietly and
peacefully, in her mother’s arms.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid bore it better than any had thought possible.
The father and mother sat together; both were
weeping very quietly. All in the room were weeping.
When Kristin went across to her father, he laid his arm
round her shoulders. He felt how she shook and trembled,
and he drew her close in to him. But to her it
seemed that he must feel as if she were further from him
far than the dead child in the bed.</p>
<p class="c015">She understood not how it was that she still held out.
She scarce remembered herself what it was she held out
for; but, lulled and dumb with grief as she was, she held
herself up and did not yield—</p>
<p class="c015">—A few planks were torn up from the church floor in
front of St. Thomas’s shrine, and a grave was hewn in
the stone-hard ground beneath for Ulvhild Lavransdatter.</p>
<p class="c015">It was snowing thick and silently all through those
days, while the child lay in the dead-straw; it was snowing
still when she was borne to the grave; and it went
on snowing, almost without cease, till a whole month
was out.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">To the folk of the Dale, waiting and waiting for the
spring to deliver them, it seemed as though it would never
come. The days grew long and light, and the steam-cloud
from the melting snow lay on all the valley as long as the
sun shone. But the cold still held the air, and there was
no strength in the heat to overcome it. By night it froze
hard—there was loud cracking from the ice, there were
booming sounds from the distant fells; and the wolves
howled and the fox barked down among the farms as at
midwinter. Men stripped the bark from the trees for their
cattle, but they dropped down dead in their stalls by
scores. None could tell how all this was to end.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_273">273</span>Kristin went out on such a day, when water was trickling
in the ruts and the snow on the fields around glistened
like silver. The snow-wreaths had been eaten away
hollow on the side toward the sun, so that the fine ice-trellis
of the snow-crust edges broke with a silver tinkle when her
foot touched them. But everywhere, where the smallest
shadow fell, the sharp cold held the air and the snow was
hard.</p>
<p class="c015">She went upward towards the church—she knew not
herself what she went to do, but something drew her there.
Her father was there—some of the free-holders, guild-brothers,
were to meet in the cloister-way, she knew.</p>
<p class="c015">Half-way up the hill she met the troop of farmers, coming
down. Sira Eirik was with them. The men were all
on foot; they walked stoopingly in a dark, shaggy knot,
and spoke no word together. They gave back her greeting
sullenly, as she went by them.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought how far away the time was when every
soul in the parish had been her friend. Like enough all
men knew now that she was a bad daughter. Perhaps
they knew yet more about her. It might well be that all
believed now there had been some truth in the old talk
about her and Arne and Bentein. It might be that she
had fallen into the worst ill-fame. She held her head
high and passed on toward the church.</p>
<p class="c015">The door stood ajar. It was cold in the church, yet
was it as though a mild warmth streamed into her heart
from the brown dusky hall with the high, upspringing
pillars holding up the darkness under the roof-beams.
There was no light on the altars, but a ray of sun shone
in through a chink of the door and gleamed faintly back
from the pictures and the holy vessels.</p>
<p class="c015">Far in before the altar of St. Thomas she saw her
father kneeling with head bent forward on his folded
hands, which held his cap crushed to his breast.</p>
<p class="c015">Shrinking back in fear and sadness, Kristin stole out and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_274">274</span>stood in the cloister-way, with her hands about two of its
small pillars. Framed in the arch between them she saw
Jörundgaard lying below, and behind her home the pale-blue
haze that filled the valley. Where the river lay
stretched through the country-side its ice and water sent
out white sparkles in the sunshine. But the alder thickets
along its bed were yellow-brown with blossom, even the
pine-wood up by the church was tinged with spring green,
and there was a piping and twittering and whistling of
little birds in the grove near by. Aye, there had been
bird-song like this each evening after the sun was
down.</p>
<p class="c015">And she felt that the longing she thought must have been
racked out of her long since, the longing in her body
and her blood, was stirring now again, faintly and feebly,
as about to waken from a winter sleep.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans Björgulfsön came out and locked the church-door
behind him. He came and stood by his daughter,
looking out through the arch next to her. She saw how
the winter gone by had harrowed her father’s face. She
understood not herself how she could touch now on what
was between them, but the words seemed to rush out of themselves:</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it true, what mother told me the other day—that you
said to her: had it been Arne Gyrdsön you would have
given me my will?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Lavrans, not looking at her.</p>
<p class="c015">“You said not so while yet Arne lived,” said Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">“It never came in question. I saw well enough that the
boy held you dear—but he said nothing—and he was young—and
I marked not ever that you had such thoughts
towards him. You could scarce think I would <i>proffer</i> my
daughter to a man of no estate?” he smiled slightly. “But
I loved the boy,” he said in a low voice; “and had I seen
you pining for love of him—”</p>
<p class="c015">They stood still, gazing. Kristin felt that her father was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_275">275</span>looking at her—she strove hard to be calm of face, but she
felt herself grow deadly white. Then her father came
towards her, put both his arms around her and pressed
her strongly to him. He bent her head backwards, looked
down into his daughter’s face, and then hid it again on
his shoulder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Jesus Kristus, little Kristin, are you <i>so</i> unhappy—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I think I shall die of it, father,” she said, her face
pressed to him.</p>
<p class="c015">She burst into weeping. But she wept because she had
felt in his caress and seen in his eyes that now he was so
worn out with pain that he could not hold out against
her any more. She had overcome him.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Far on in the night she was wakened in the dark by
her father’s touch on her shoulder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Get up,” he said softly. “Do you hear—?”</p>
<p class="c015">She heard the singing of the wind round the house-corners—the
deep, full note of the south-wind, heavy with
wetness. Streams were pouring from the roof; there was
the whisper of rain falling on soft melting snow.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin flung her dress on her back and went after her
father to the outer door. They stood together looking
out into the twilight of the May night—warm wind and
rain smote against them—the heavens were a welter of
tangled drifting rain-clouds, the woods roared, the wind
whistled between the houses, and from far up in the fells
they heard the dull boom of snow-masses falling.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin felt for her father’s hand and held it. He had
called her that he might show her this. So had it been
between them before, that he would have done this; and
so it was now again.</p>
<p class="c015">When they went in to bed again, Lavrans said:</p>
<p class="c015">“The stranger serving-man that came last week brought
me letters from Sir Munan Baardsön. He is minded to
come up the Dale to our parts next summer to see his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_276">276</span>mother; and he asked if he might meet me and have
speech with me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“What will you answer him, my father?” she whispered.</p>
<p class="c015">“That can I not tell you now,” said Lavrans. “But I
will speak with him; and then must I order this matter
so as I may deem I can answer it to God, my daughter.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin crept in again beside Ramborg, and Lavrans
went and lay down by the side of his sleeping wife. He
lay thinking that if the flood came over-sudden and strong
there were few places in the parish that lay so much in
its path as Jörundgaard. Folk said there was a prophecy
that some day the river would carry it away.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">5</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">Spring came at a single bound. Only a few days after
the sudden thaw the whole parish lay dark brown under
the flooding rain. The waters rushed foaming down the hillsides,
the river swelled up and lay in the valley-bottom, like
a great leaden-grey lake, with lines of tree-tops floating on
its waters and a treacherous bubbling furrow where the
current ran. At Jörundgaard the water stood far up over
the fields. But everywhere the mischief done was less than
folk had feared.</p>
<p class="c015">Of necessity the spring work was thrown late, and the
people sowed their scanty corn with prayers to God that
He would save it from the night-frosts in autumn. And
it looked as though He would hearken to them and a little
ease their burdens. June came in with mild, growing
weather, the summer was good, and folk set their faces
forward in hope that the marks of the evil year might be
wiped out in time.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The hay harvest had been got in, when one evening
four men rode up to Jörundgaard. First came two knights,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_277">277</span>and behind them their serving-men; and the knights were
Sir Munan Baardsön and Sir Baard Petersön of Hestnæs.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid and Lavrans had the board spread in the upper
hall, and beds made ready in the guest-room over the
store-house. But Lavrans begged the knights to tarry with
their errand till the next day, when they should be rested
from their journey.</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Munan led the talk throughout the meal; he turned
much to Kristin in talking, and spoke as if he and she
were well-acquainted. She saw that this was not to her
father’s liking. Sir Munan was square-built, red-faced,
ugly, talkative, and something of a buffoon in his bearing.
People called him Dumpy Munan or Dance Munan. But
for all his flighty bearing Lady Aashild’s son was a man
of understanding and parts, who had been used by the
Crown more than once in matters of trust, and was known
to have a word in the counsels of them that guided the
affairs of the kingdom. He held his mother’s heritage
in the Skogheim Hundred; was exceeding rich, and had
made a rich marriage. Lady Katrin, his wife, was hard-featured
beyond the common, and seldom opened her
mouth; but her husband ever spoke of her as if she were
the wisest of dames, so that she was known in jest as Lady
Katrin the Ready-witted, or the Silver-tongued. They
seemed to live with each other well and lovingly, though
Sir Munan was known all too well for the looseness of
his life both before and after his marriage.</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Baard Petersön was a comely and a stately old man,
even though now somewhat ample of girth and heavy-limbed.
His hair and beard were faded now, but their
hue was still as much yellow as ’twas white. Since King
Magnus Haakonsön’s death he had lived retired, managing
his great possessions in Nordmöre. He was a widower
for the second time, and had many children, who, it was
said, were all comely, well-nurtured and well-to-do.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_278">278</span>The next day Lavrans and his guests went up to the
upper hall for their parley. Lavrans would have had his
wife be present with them, but she would not:</p>
<p class="c015">“This matter must be in your hands wholly. You know
well ’twill be the heaviest of sorrows for our daughter if
it should come to naught; but I see well that there are
but too many things that may make against this marriage.”</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Munan brought forth a letter from Erlend Nikulaussön.
Erlend’s proffer was that Lavrans should fix, himself,
each and all of the conditions, if he would betroth his
daughter Kristin to him. Erlend was willing to have
all his possessions valued and his incomings appraised
by impartial men, and to grant to Kristin such extra-gift
and morning-gift, that she would possess a third of all
his estate besides her own dowry and all such heritage
as might come to her from her kin, should she be left a
widow without living children. Further his proffer was to
grant Kristin full power to deal at her pleasure with her
share of the common estate, both what she had of her
own kindred and what came to her from her husband.
But if Lavrans wished for other terms of settlement, Erlend
was most willing to hear his wishes and to follow
them in all things. To one thing only he asked that Kristin’s
kindred, on their side, should bind themselves: that,
should the guardianship of his children and Kristin’s ever
come to them, they would never try to set aside the gifts
he had made to his children by Eline Ormsdatter, but
would let all such gifts hold good, as having passed from
his estate before his entry into wedlock with Kristin Lavransdatter.
At the end of all Erlend made proffer to
hold the wedding in all seemly state at Husaby.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans spoke in reply:</p>
<p class="c015">“This is a fair proffer. I see by it that your kinsman
has it much at heart to come to terms with me. All the
more is this plain to me by reason that he has moved
you, Sir Munan, to come for the second time on such an
<span class="pageno" id="Page_279">279</span>errand to a man like me, who am of little weight beyond
my own country-side; and that a knight like you, Sir
Baard, hath been at the pains of making such a journey
to further his cause. But concerning Erlend’s proffer I
would say this: my daughter has not been bred up to deal
herself with the ordering of goods and gear, but I have
ever hoped to give her to such a man as that I could lay
the maid’s welfare in his hands with an easy mind. I
know not, indeed, whether Kristin be fit to be set in such
authority, but I can scarce believe that ’twould be for her
good. She is mild of mood and biddable—and ’twas one
of the reasons I have had in mind in setting myself against
this marriage, that ’tis known Erlend has shown want of
understanding in more matters than one. Had she been a
power-loving, bold and head-strong woman, then indeed
the matter had taken on another face.”</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Munan burst out laughing:</p>
<p class="c015">“Dear Lavrans, lament you that the maid is not head-strong
enough—?” and Sir Baard said with a little smile:</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks your daughter has shown that she lacks not
a will of her own—for two years now she has held to
Erlend clean against your will.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have not forgotten it; yet do I know well what I say.
She has suffered sorely herself all this time she has stood
against me; nor will she long be glad with a husband
who cannot rule her.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay then the devil’s in it!” said Sir Munan. “Then
must your daughter be far unlike all the women I have
known; for I have never seen <i>one</i> that was not fain to rule
herself—and her man to boot!”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans shrugged his shoulders and made no answer.</p>
<p class="c015">Then said Baard Petersön:</p>
<p class="c015">“I can well believe, Lavrans Björgulfsön, that you have
found this marriage between your daughter and my foster-son
no more to your liking, since the woman who had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_280">280</span>lived with him came to the end we know of last year.
But you must know it has come out now that the unhappy
woman had let herself be led astray by another man,
Erlend’s steward at Husaby. Erlend knew of this when he
went with her down the Dale; he had proffered to portion
her fittingly, if the man would wed her.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Are you well assured that this is so?” asked Lavrans.
“And yet I know not,” he said again, “if the thing is anyway
bettered thereby. Hard must it be for a woman come
of good kindred to go into a house hand and hand with
the master, and be led out by the serving-man.”</p>
<p class="c015">Munan Baardsön took the word:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis plain to me, Lavrans Björgulfsön, that what goes
against my cousin most with you, is that he has had these
hapless dealings with Sigurd Saksulvsön’s wife. And true
it is that ’twas not well done of him. But in God’s name,
man, you must remember this—here was this young boy
dwelling in one house with a young and fair woman, and
she had an old, cold, strengthless husband—and the night
is a half-year long up there: methinks a man could scarce
look for aught else to happen, unless Erlend had been a
very saint. There is no denying it: Erlend had made
at all times but a sorry monk; but methinks your young,
fair daughter would give you little thanks, should you give
her a monkish husband.—True it is that Erlend bore
himself like a fool then, and a yet greater fool since—But
the thing should not stand against him for ever—we
his kinsmen have striven to help the boy to his feet again;
the woman is dead; and Erlend has done all in his power
to care for her body and her soul; the Bishop of Oslo
himself hath absolved him of his sin, and now is he come
home again made clean by the Holy Blood at Schwerin—would
you be stricter than the Bishop of Oslo, and the
Archbishop at Schwerin—or whoever it may be that hath
charge of that precious blood—?</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_281">281</span>“Dear Lavrans, true it is that chastity is a fair thing
indeed; but ’tis verily hard for a grown man to attain to
it without a special gift of grace from God. By St. Olav—Aye,
and you should remember too that the Holy King
himself was not granted that gift till his life here below
was drawing to an end—very like ’twas God’s will that he
should first beget that doughty youth King Magnus, who
smote down the heathen when they raged against the
Nordlands. I wot well King Olav had that son by another
than his Queen—yet doth he sit amidst the highest saints
in the host of heaven. Aye, I can see in your face that
you deem this unseemly talk—”</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Baard broke in:</p>
<p class="c015">“Lavrans Björgulfsön, I liked this matter no better than
you, when first Erlend came to me and said he had set his
heart on a maid that was handfast to another. But since
then I have come to know that there is so great kindness
between these two young folk, that ’twould be great pity
to part their loves. Erlend was with me at the last Yule-tide
feasting King Haakon held for his men—they met together
there, and scarce had they seen each other when
your daughter swooned away and lay a long while as one
dead—and I saw in my foster-son’s face that he would
rather lose his life than lose her.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat still awhile before answering:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye; all such things sound fair and fine when a man
hears them told in a knightly saga of the Southlands. But
we are not in Bretland here, and ’tis like you too would
ask more in the man you would choose for son-in-law than
that he had brought your daughter to swoon away for love
in all folk’s sight—”</p>
<p class="c015">The two others were silent, and Lavrans went on:</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis in my mind, good Sirs, that had Erlend Nikulaussön
not made great waste both of his goods and of his
fame, you would scarce be sitting here pleading so strongly
<span class="pageno" id="Page_282">282</span>with a man of my estate that I should give my daughter to
him. But I would be loth it should be said of Kristin that
’twas an honour for her to wed a great estate and a man
from amongst the highest in the land—after the man had
so beshamed himself, that he could not look to make a
better match, or keep undiminished the honour of his
house.”</p>
<p class="c015">He rose in heat, and began walking to and fro.</p>
<p class="c015">But Sir Munan started up:</p>
<p class="c015">“Now, before God, Lavrans, if the talk is of shame, I
would have you know you are over-proud in—”</p>
<p class="c015">Sir Baard broke in quickly, going up to Lavrans:</p>
<p class="c015">“Proud you are, Lavrans—you are like those udal
farmers we have heard of in olden times, who would have
naught to do with the titles the Kings would have given
them, because their pride could not brook that folk should
say they owed thanks to any but themselves. I tell you,
that were Erlend still master of all the honour and riches
the boy was born to, yet would I never deem that I demeaned
him or myself in asking a well-born and wealthy
man to give his daughter to my foster-son, if I knew that
the two young creatures might break their hearts if they
parted. And the rather,” he said in a low voice, laying
his hand on Lavrans’ shoulder, “if so it were that ’twould
be best for the souls of both they should wed each other.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans drew away from the other’s hand; his face grew
set and cold:</p>
<p class="c015">“I scarce believe I understand your meaning, Sir
Knight?”</p>
<p class="c015">The two men looked at each other for a space; then
Sir Baard said:</p>
<p class="c015">“I mean that Erlend has told me, they two have sworn
troth to each other with the dearest oaths. Maybe you
would say that you have power to loose your child from
her oath, since she swore without your will. But Erlend
you cannot loose.—And for aught I can see what most
<span class="pageno" id="Page_283">283</span>stands in the road is your pride—and the hate you bear to
sin. But in that ’tis to me as though you were minded to
be stricter than God himself, Lavrans Björgulfsön.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans answered somewhat uncertainly:</p>
<p class="c015">“It may be there is truth in this that you say to me,
Sir Baard. But what most has set me against this match
is that I have deemed Erlend to be so unsure a man that
I could not trust my daughter to his hands.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks I can answer for my foster-son now,” said
Baard quietly. “Kristin is so dear to him that I know, if
you will give her to him, he will prove in the event such
a son-in-law that you shall have no cause of grief.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans did not answer at once. Then Sir Baard said
earnestly, holding out his hand:</p>
<p class="c015">“In God’s name, Lavrans Björgulfsön, give your consent!”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans laid his hand in Sir Baard’s:</p>
<p class="c015">“In God’s name!”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid and Kristin were called to the upper hall, and
Lavrans told them his will. Sir Baard greeted the two
women in fair and courtly fashion; Sir Munan took Ragnfrid
by the hand and spoke to her in seemly wise, but
Kristin he greeted in the foreign fashion with a kiss, and
he took time over his greeting. Kristin felt that her father
looked at her while this was doing.</p>
<p class="c015">“How like you your new kinsman, Sir Munan?” he
asked jestingly when he was alone with her for a moment
late that evening.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin looked beseechingly at him. Then he stroked her
face a little and said no more.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">When Sir Baard and Sir Munan went to their room,
Munan broke out:</p>
<p class="c015">“Not a little would I give to see this Lavrans Björgulfsön’s
face, should he come to know the truth about this
<span class="pageno" id="Page_284">284</span>precious daughter of his. Here have you and I had to
beg on our knees to win for Erlend a woman he has had
with him in Brynhild’s house many times—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Hold your peace—no word of that,” answered Sir
Baard in wrath. “’Twas the worst deed Erlend ever did,
to lure that child to such places—and see that Lavrans
never hear aught of it; the best that can happen now for
all is that those two should be friends.”</p>
<p class="c015">The feast for the drinking of the betrothal ale was appointed
to be held that same autumn. Lavrans said he
could not make the feast very great, the year before had
been such a bad one in the Dale; but to make up he would
bear the cost of the wedding himself, and hold it at
Jörundgaard in all seemly state. He named the bad year
again as the cause why he required that the time of betrothal
should last a year.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">6</h3>
<p class="c017">For more reasons than one the betrothal feast was
put off; it was not held till the New Year; but Lavrans
agreed that the bridal need not therefore be delayed; it was
to be just after Michaelmas, as was fixed at first.</p>
<p class="c015">So Kristin sat now at Jörundgaard as Erlend’s betrothed
in all men’s sight. Along with her mother she looked over
all the goods and gear that had been gathered and saved
up for her portion, and strove to add still more to the great
piles of bedding and clothes; for when once Lavrans had
given his daughter to the master of Husaby, it was his
will that naught should be spared.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin wondered herself at times that she did not feel
more glad. But, spite of all the busyness, there was no
true gladness at Jörundgaard.</p>
<p class="c015">Her father and mother missed Ulvhild sorely, that she
saw. But she understood too that ’twas not that alone
<span class="pageno" id="Page_285">285</span>which made them so silent and so joyless. They were kind
to her, but when they talked with her of her betrothed, she
saw that they did but force themselves to it to please her
and show her kindness; ’twas not that they themselves had
a mind to speak of Erlend. They had not learned to take
more joy in the marriage she was making, now they had
come to know the man. Erlend, too, had kept himself
quiet and withdrawn the short time he had been at Jörundgaard
for the betrothal—and like enough this could not
have been otherwise, thought Kristin; for he knew it was
with no good will her father had given his consent.</p>
<p class="c015">She herself and Erlend had scarce had the chance to
speak ten words alone together. And it had brought a
strange unwonted feeling, to sit together thus in all folk’s
sight; at such times they had little to say, by reason of the
many things between them that could not be said. There
arose in her a doubtful fear, vague and dim, but always
present—perhaps ’twould make it hard for them in some
way after they were wedded, that they had come all too
near to each other at the first, and after had lived so long
quite parted.</p>
<p class="c015">But she tried to thrust the fear away. It was meant that
Erlend should visit them at Whitsuntide; he had asked
Lavrans and Ragnfrid if they had aught against his coming,
and Lavrans had laughed a little, and answered that
Erlend might be sure his daughter’s bridegroom would be
welcome.</p>
<p class="c015">At Whitsuntide they would be able to go out together;
they would have a chance to speak together as in the old
days, and then surely it would fade away, the shadow that
had come between them in this long time apart, when each
had gone about alone bearing a burden the other could
not share.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">At Easter Simon Andressön and his wife came to Formo.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_286">286</span>Kristin saw them in the church. Simon’s wife was standing
not far off from her.</p>
<p class="c015">She must be much older than he, thought Kristin—nigh
thirty years old. Lady Halfrid was little and slender and
thin, but she had an exceeding gracious visage. The very
hue of her pale-brown hair as it flowed in waves from
under her linen coif, seemed, as it were, so gentle, and her
eyes too were full of gentleness; they were great grey eyes
flecked with tiny golden specks. Every feature of her face
was fine and pure—but her skin was something dull and
grey, and when she opened her mouth one saw that her
teeth were not good. She looked not as though she were
strong, and folks said indeed that she was sickly—she had
miscarried more than once already, Kristin had heard.
She wondered how it would fare with Simon with this wife.</p>
<p class="c015">The Jörundgaard folk and they of Formo had greeted
each other across the church-green more than once, but
had not spoken. But on Easter-day Simon was in the
church without his wife. He went across to Lavrans, and
they spoke together a while. Kristin heard Ulvhild’s name
spoken. Afterwards he spoke with Ragnfrid. Ramborg,
who was standing by her mother, called out aloud: “I
mind you quite well—<i>I</i> know who you are.” Simon lifted
the child up a little and twirled her round: “’Tis well
done of you, Ramborg, not to have forgotten me.” Kristin
he only greeted from some way off; and her father and
mother said no word afterward of the meeting.</p>
<p class="c015">But Kristin pondered much upon it. For all that had
come and gone, it had been strange to see Simon Darre
again as a wedded man. So much that was past came to
life again at the sight; she remembered her own blind and
all-yielding love for Erlend in those days. Now, she felt,
there was some change in it. The thought came to her:
how if Simon had told his wife how they had come to
part, he and she—but she knew he had kept silence—“for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_287">287</span>my father’s sake,” she thought scoffingly. ’Twas a poor
showing, and strange, that she should be still living here
unwed, in her parents’ house. But at least they were betrothed;
Simon could see that they had had their way in
spite of all. Whatever else Erlend might have done, to <i>her</i>
he had held faithfully, and she had not been loose or
wanton.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">One evening in early spring Ragnfrid had to send down
the valley to old Gunhild, the widow who sewed furs.
The evening was so fair that Kristin asked if she might not
go; at last they gave her leave, since all the men were busy.</p>
<p class="c015">It was after sunset, and a fine white frost-haze was rising
toward the gold-green sky. Kristin heard at each hoof-stroke
the brittle sound of the evening’s ice as it broke and
flew outwards in tinkling splinters. But from all the roadside
brakes there was a happy noise of birds singing,
softly but full-throated with spring, into the twilight.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin rode sharply downwards; she thought not much
of anything, but felt only it was good to be abroad alone
once more. She rode with her eyes fixed on the new moon
sinking down toward the mountain ridge on the far side
of the Dale; and she had near fallen from her horse when
he suddenly swerved aside and reared.</p>
<p class="c015">She saw a dark body lying huddled together at the roadside—and
at first she was afraid. The hateful fear that
had passed into her blood—the fear of meeting people alone
by the way—she could never quite be rid of. But she
thought ’twas maybe a wayfaring man who had fallen sick;
so when she had mastered her horse again, she turned and
rode back, calling out to know who it was.</p>
<p class="c015">The bundle stirred a little, and a voice said:</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks ’tis you yourself, Kristin Lavransdatter—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Brother Edwin?” she asked softly. She came near to
thinking this was some phantom or some deviltry sent to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_288">288</span>trick her. But she went nigh to him; it was the old monk
himself, and he could not raise himself from the ground
without help.</p>
<p class="c015">“My dear Father—are you wandering at this time of the
year?” she said in wonder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Praise be to God, who sent you this way to-night,”
said the monk. Kristin saw that his whole body was shaking.
“I was coming north to you folks, but my legs would
carry me no further this night. Almost I deemed ’twas
God’s will that I should lie down and die on the roads I
have been wandering about on all my life. But I was fain
to see you once again, my daughter—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin helped the monk up on her horse; then led it
homeward by the bridle, holding him on. And, all the
time he was lamenting that now she would get her feet
wet in the icy slush, she could hear him moaning softly
with pain.</p>
<p class="c015">He told her that he had been at Eyabu since Yule. Some
rich farmers of the parish had vowed in the bad year to
beautify their church with new adornments. But the work
had gone slowly; he had been sick the last of the winter—the
evil was in his stomach—it could bear no food, and
he vomited blood. He believed himself he had not long
to live, and he longed now to be home in his cloister, for
he was fain to die there among his own brethren. But he
had a mind first to come north up the Dale one last time,
and so he had set out, along with the monk who came from
Hamar to be the new prior of the pilgrim hospice at Roaldstad.
From Fron he had come on alone.</p>
<p class="c015">“I heard that you were betrothed,” he said, “to that man—and
then such a longing came on me to see you. It
seemed to me a sore thing that that should be our last
meeting, that time in our church at Oslo. It has been a
heavy burden on my heart, Kristin, that you had strayed
away into the path where is no peace—”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin kissed the monk’s hand:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_289">289</span>“Truly I know not, Father, what I have done, or how
deserved, that you show me such great love.”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk answered in a low voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“I have thought many a time, Kristin, that had it so befallen
we had met more often, then might you have come to
be as my daughter in the spirit.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Mean you that you would have brought me to turn my
heart to the holy life of the cloister?” asked Kristin.
Then, a little after, she said: “Sira Eirik laid a command
on me that, should I not win my father’s consent and be
wed with Erlend, then must I join with a godly sisterhood
and make atonement for my sins—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I have prayed many a time that the longing for the
holy life might come to you,” said Brother Edwin. “But
not since you told me that you wot of—I would have had
you come to God, wearing your garland, Kristin—”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">When they came to Jörundgaard Brother Edwin had to
be lifted down and borne in to his bed. They laid him
in the old winter house, in the hearth-room, and cared for
him most tenderly. He was very sick, and Sira Eirik came
and tended him with medicines for the body and the soul.
But the priest said the old man’s sickness was cancer, and
it could not be that he had long to live. Brother Edwin
himself said that when he had gained a little strength he
would journey south again and try to come home to his
own cloister. But Sira Eirik told the others he could not
believe this was to be thought of.</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed to all at Jörundgaard that a great peace and
gladness had come to them with the monk. Folks came
and went in the hearth room all day long, and there was
never any lack of watchers to sit at nights by the sick man.
As many as had time flocked in to listen, when Sira Eirik
came over and read to the dying man from godly books,
and they talked much with Brother Edwin of spiritual
things. And though much of what he said was dark and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_290">290</span>veiled, even as his speech was wont to be, it seemed to
these folks that he strengthened and comforted their souls,
because each and all could see that Brother Edwin was
wholly filled with the love of God.</p>
<p class="c015">But the monk was fain to hear, too, of all kind of other
things—asked the news of the parishes round, and had
Lavrans tell him all the story of the evil year of drought.
There were some folk who had betaken them to evil courses
in that tribulation, turning to such helpers as Christian
men should most abhor. Some way in over the ridges west
of the Dale was a place in the mountains where were certain
great white stones, of obscene shapes, and some men
had fallen so low as to sacrifice boars and gib-cats before
these abominations. So Sira Eirik moved some of the
boldest, most God-fearing farmers to come with him one
night and break the stones in pieces. Lavrans had been
with them, and could bear witness that the stones were
all besmeared with blood, and there lay bones and other
refuse all around them—’Twas said that up in Heidal
the people had had an old crone sit out on a great earth-fast
rock three Thursday nights, chanting ancient spells.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">One night Kristin sat alone by Brother Edwin. At midnight
he woke up, and seemed to be suffering great pain.
Then he bade Kristin take the book of Miracles of the
Virgin Mary, which Sira Eirik had lent to Brother Edwin,
and read to him.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin was little used to read aloud, but she set herself
down on the step of the bed and placed the candle by her
side; she laid the book on her lap and read as well as she
could.</p>
<p class="c015">In a little while she saw that the sick man was lying
with teeth set tight, clenching his wasted hands as the fits
of agony took him.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are suffering much, dear Father,” said Kristin sorrowfully.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_291">291</span>“It seems so to me, now. But I know ’tis but that God
has made me a little child again and is tossing me about,
up and down—</p>
<p class="c015">“I mind me one time when I was little—four winters old
I was then—I had run away from home into the woods.
I lost myself, and wandered about many days and nights—My
mother was with the folks that found me, and when
she caught me up in her arms, I mind me well, she bit
me in my neck. I thought it was that she was angry with
me—but afterward I knew better—</p>
<p class="c015">“I long, myself, now, to be home out of this forest. It
is written: forsake ye all things and follow me—but there
has been all too much in this world that I had no mind
to forsake—”</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>You</i>, Father?” said Kristin. “Ever have I heard all
men say that you have been a pattern for pure life and
poverty and humbleness—”</p>
<p class="c015">The monk laughed slily.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, a young child like you thinks, maybe, there are
no other lures in the world than pleasure and riches and
power. But I say to you, these are small things men find
by the wayside; and I—I have loved the ways themselves—not
the small things of the world did I love, but the
<i>whole</i> world. God gave me grace to love Lady Poverty
and Lady Chastity from my youth up, and thus methought
with these playfellows it was safe to wander, and so I have
roved and wandered, and would have been fain to roam
over all the ways of the earth. And my heart and my
thoughts have roamed and wandered too—I fear me I
have often gone astray in my thoughts on the most hidden
things. But now ’tis all over, little Kristin; I will home
now to my house and lay aside all my own thoughts, and
hearken to the clear words of the Gardian telling what I
should believe and think concerning my sin and the mercy
of God—”</p>
<p class="c015">A little while after he dropped asleep. Kristin went
<span class="pageno" id="Page_292">292</span>and sat by the hearth tending the fire. But well on in the
morning, when she was nigh dozing off herself, of a sudden
Brother Edwin spoke from the bed:</p>
<p class="c015">“Glad am I, Kristin, that this matter of you and Erlend
Nikulaussön is brought to a good end.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin burst out weeping:</p>
<p class="c015">“We have done so much wrong before we came so far.
And what gnaws at my heart most is that I have brought
my father so much sorrow. He has no joy in this wedding
either. And even so he knows not—did he know
all—I trow he would take his kindness quite from me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Kristin,” said Brother Edwin gently, “see you not,
child, that ’tis therefore you must keep it from him, and
’tis therefore you must give him no more cause of sorrow—because
he never will call on you to pay the penalty.
Nothing you could do could turn your father’s
heart from you.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">A few days later Brother Edwin was grown so much
better that he would fain set out on his journey southward.
Since his heart was set on this, Lavrans had a kind of
litter made, to be slung between two horses, and on this
he brought the sick man as far south as to Lidstad; there
they gave him fresh horses and men to tend him on his
way, and in this wise was he brought as far as Hamar.
There he died in the cloister of the Preaching Friars,
and was buried in their church. Afterward the Barefoot
Friars claimed that his body should be delivered to
them; for that many folks all about in the parishes held
him to be a holy man, and spoke of him by the name
of Saint Evan. The peasants of the Uplands and the
Dales, all the way north to Trondheim, prayed to him as
a saint. So it came about that there was a long dispute
between the two Orders about his body.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin heard naught of this till long after. But she
grieved sorely at parting from the monk. It seemed to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_293">293</span>her that he alone knew all her life—he had known the
innocent child as she was in her father’s keeping, and he
had known her secret life with Erlend; so that he was,
as it were, a link, binding together all that had first been
dear to her with all that now filled her heart and mind.
Now was she quite cut off from herself as she had been
in the time when she was yet a maid.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Ragnfrid, feeling with her hand the lukewarm
brew in the vats, “methinks ’tis cool enough now to
mix in the barm.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin had been sitting in the brew-house doorway
spinning, while she waited for the brew to cool. She
laid down the spindle on the threshold, unwrapped the
rug from the pail of risen yeast, and began measuring out.</p>
<p class="c015">“Shut the door first,” bade her mother, “so the draught
may not come in—you seem walking in your sleep, Kristin,”
she said testily.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin poured the yeast in to the vats, while Ragnfrid
stirred.</p>
<p class="c015">—Geirhild Drivsdatter called on Hatt, but he was Odin.
So he came and helped her with the brewing; and he
craved for his wage that which was between the vat and
her—’Twas a saga that Lavrans had once told when
she was little. That which was between the vat and her—</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin felt dizzy and sick with the heat and the sweet
spicy-smelling steam that filled the dark close-shut brew-house.</p>
<p class="c015">Out in the farm-place Ramborg and a band of children
were dancing in a ring, singing:</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c018">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">“The eagle sits on the topmost hill-crag</div>
<div class="line in4">Crooking his golden claws....”</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c017">Kristin followed her mother through the little outer
room where lay empty ale-kegs and all kinds of brewing
gear. A door led from it out to a strip of ground
<span class="pageno" id="Page_294">294</span>between the back wall of the brew-house and the fence
round the barley-field. A herd of pigs jostled each
other, and bit and squealed as they fought over the lukewarm
grains thrown out to them.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin shaded her eyes against the blinding midday
sunlight. The mother looked at the pigs and said:</p>
<p class="c015">“With less than eighteen reindeer we shall never win
through.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you we shall need so many?” said her daughter,
absently.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, for we must have game to serve up with the pork
each day,” answered Ragnfrid. “And of wild-fowl and
hare we shall scarce have more than will serve for the
table in the upper hall. Remember, ’twill be well on
toward two hundred people we shall have on the place—counting
serving-folk and children—and the poor that
have to be fed. And even should you and Erlend set
forth on the fifth day, some of the guests, I trow, will
stay out the week—at the least.”</p>
<p class="c015">“You must stay here and look to the ale, Kristin,” she
went on. “’Tis time for me to get dinner for your father
and the reapers.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Kristin fetched her spinning gear and sat herself down
there in the back doorway. She put the distaff with the
bunch of wool up under her arm-pit, but her hands, with
the spindle in them, sank into her lap.</p>
<p class="c015">Beyond the fence the ears of barley gleamed silvery and
silken in the sunshine. Above the song of the river she
heard now and again from the meadows on the river-island
the ring of a scythe—sometimes the iron would
strike upon a stone. Her father and the house-folk were
hard at work on the hay-making, to get it off their hands.
For there was much to get through and to make ready
against her wedding.</p>
<p class="c015">The scent of the lukewarm grains, and the rank smell
<span class="pageno" id="Page_295">295</span>of the swine—she grew qualmish again. And the midday
heat made her so dizzy and faint. White and stiffly upright
she sat and waited for it to pass over—she <i>would</i>
not to be sick again—</p>
<p class="c015">Never before had she felt what now she felt. ’Twas
of no avail to try to tell herself for comfort: it was not
certain yet—she might be wrong——That which was
between the vat and her—</p>
<p class="c015">Eighteen reindeer. Well on toward two hundred wedding-guests—Folk
would have a rare jest to laugh at
when ’twas known that all this hubbub had but been about
a breeding woman they had to see and get married before—</p>
<p class="c015">Oh no. She threw her spinning from her and started up
as the sickness overcame her again—Oh no, it was sure
enough!—</p>
<p class="c015">They were to be wedded the second Sunday after
Michaelmas, and the bridal was to last for five days. There
were more than two months still to wait; they would be
sure to see it on her—her mother and the other housewives
of the parish. They were ever wise in such things—knew
them months before Kristin could understand how
they saw them. “Poor thing, she grows so pale”—Impatiently
Kristin rubbed her hands against her cheeks; she
felt that they were white and bloodless.</p>
<p class="c015">Before, she had so often thought: this must happen soon
or late. And she had not feared it so terribly. But
’twould not have been the same then, when they could
not—were forbidden to come together in lawful wise. It
was counted—aye, a shame in a manner, and a sin too—but
if ’twere two young things who <i>would not</i> let themselves
be forced apart, folk remembered that ’twas so, and
spoke of them with forbearance. <i>She</i> would not have been
ashamed. But when such things happened between a betrothed
pair—there was naught for them but laughter and
gross jesting. She saw it herself—one could not but
<span class="pageno" id="Page_296">296</span>laugh: here was brewing and mixing of wine, slaughtering
and baking and cooking for a wedding that should be
noised far abroad in the land—and she, the bride, grew
qualmish if she but smelt food, and crept in a cold sweat
behind the out-houses to be sick.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend. She set her teeth hard in anger. He should
have spared her this. For she had not been willing. He
should have remembered that before, when all had been
so unsure for her, when she had had naught to trust to
but his love, she had ever, ever gladly been his. He should
have let her be now, when she tried to deny him because
she thought ’twas not well of them to take aught by
stealth, after her father had joined their hands together
in the sight of Erlend’s kinsmen and hers. But he had
taken her to him, half by force, with laughter and caresses;
so that she had not had strength enough to show
him she was in earnest in her denial.</p>
<p class="c015">She went in and saw to the beer in the vats, then came
back again and stood leaning on the fence. The standing
grain moved gently in shining ripples before a breath
of wind. She could not remember any year when she
had seen the corn-fields bear such thick and abundant
growth.—The river glittered far off, and she heard her
father’s voice shouting—she could not catch the words,
but she could hear the reapers on the island laughing.</p>
<p class="c015">Should she go to her father and tell him: ’Twould be
best to let be all this weary bustle and let Erlend and her
come together quietly without church-wedding or splendid
feasts—now that the one thing needful was that she
should bear the name of wife before ’twas plain to all
men that she bore Erlend’s child under her heart already?</p>
<p class="c015"><i>He</i> would be a laughing-stock, Erlend too, as much as
she—or even more, for he was no green boy any longer.
But it was he who would have this wedding; he had set
his heart on seeing her stand as his bride in silk and velvets
and tall golden crown—<i>that</i> was his will, and it had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_297">297</span>been his will, too, to possess her in those sweet secret
hours of last spring. She had yielded to him in that.
And she must do his will too in this other thing.</p>
<p class="c015">But in the end ’twas like he would be forced to see—no
one could have it both ways in such things. He had
talked so much of the great Yule-tide feast he would
hold at Husaby the first year she sat there as mistress
of his house—how he would show forth to all his kinsmen
and friends and all the folks from far around the fair wife he
had won. Kristin smiled scornfully. A seemly thing
’twould be this Yule-tide, such a home-coming feast!</p>
<p class="c015">Her time would be at St. Gregory’s Mass or thereabout.
Thoughts seemed to swarm and jostle in her mind
when she said to herself that at Gregory’s Mass she was
to bear a child. There was some fear among the thoughts—she
remembered how her mother’s cries had rung all
round the farm-place for two whole days, the time that
Ulvhild was born. At Ulvsvold two young wives had
died in childbirth, one after the other—and Sigurd of
Loptsgaard’s first wives too. And her own father’s
mother, whose name she bore—</p>
<p class="c015">But fear was not uppermost in her mind. She had
often thought, when after that first time she saw no sign
that she was with child—maybe this was to be their
punishment—hers and Erlend’s. She would always be barren.
They would wait and wait in vain for what they
had feared before, would hope as vainly as of old they
had feared needlessly—till at last they would know that
one day they should be borne forth from the home of his
fathers and be as though they had never been—for his
brother was a priest, and the children he had could inherit
naught from him. Dumpy Munan and his sons would
come in and sit in their seats, and Erlend would be blotted
out from the line of his kindred.</p>
<p class="c015">She pressed her hand hard to her body. It was there—between
the fence and her—between the vat and her.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_298">298</span>’Twas between her and all the world—Erlend’s own son.
She had made the trial already that she had once heard
Lady Aashild speak of; with blood from her right arm
and her left. ’Twas a son that was coming to her—whatever
fate he was to bring—She remembered her dead
little brothers, her parents’ sorrowful faces when they
spoke of them; she remembered all the times she had seen
them both in despair for Ulvhild’s sake—and the night
when Ulvhild died. And she thought of all the sorrow
she herself had brought them, of her father’s grief-worn
face—and the end was not yet of the sorrows she was
to bring on her father and mother.</p>
<p class="c015">And yet—and yet. Kristin laid her head on the arm
that rested on the fence; the other hand she still held to
her body. Even if it brought her new sorrows, even if
it led her feet down to death—she would rather die in
bearing Erlend a son than that they should both die one
day, and leave their houses standing empty, and the corn
on their lands should wave for strangers—</p>
<p class="c015">She heard a footstep in the room behind her. The ale!
thought Kristin—I should have seen to it long ago. She
stood up and turned—and Erlend came stooping through
the doorway and stepped out into the sunlight—his face
shining with gladness.</p>
<p class="c015">“Is this where you are?” he asked. “And not a step
will you come to meet me, even?” he said; and came and
threw his arms about her.</p>
<p class="c015">“Dearest; are you come hither?” she said in wonder.</p>
<p class="c015">It was plain he was just alighted from his horse—his
cloak still hung from his shoulder, and his sword at his side—he
was unshaven, travel-soiled and covered with dust.
He was clad in a red surcoat that hung in folds from its
collar and was open up the sides almost to the armpits.
As they passed through the brew-house and across the
courtyard, the coat swung and flapped about him so that
his thighs showed right up to the waist. His legs bent a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_299">299</span>little outwards when he walked—it was strange she had
never marked it before—she had only seen that he had long
slender legs, with fine ankles and small well-shaped feet.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend had come well-attended—with five men and four
led-horses. He told Ragnfrid that he was come to fetch
Kristin’s goods—’twould be more homely for her, he
thought, to find the things awaiting her at Husaby when
she came thither. And so late in the autumn as the wedding
was to be, it might be harder then to have the goods
brought across the hills—besides they might easily be
spoiled by the sea-water on ship-board. Now the Abbot
of Nidarholm had proffered to give him leave to send
them by the Laurentius galleass—’twas meant she should
sail from Veöy about Assumption Day. So he was come
to have the goods carted over to Romsdal and down to Næs.</p>
<p class="c015">He sat in the doorway of the kitchen-house, drinking ale
and talking while Ragnfrid and Kristin plucked the wild-duck
Lavrans had brought home the day before. Mother
and daughter were alone on the place; all the women were
busy raking in the meadows. He looked so glad and
happy—he was pleased with himself for coming on such
a wise and prudent errand.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid went out, and Kristin stayed minding the
spit with the roasting birds. Through the open door she
could catch a glimpse of Erlend’s men lying in the shadow
on the other side of the courtyard, with the ale-bowl
circling among them. Erlend himself sat on the threshold,
chatting and laughing—the sun shone right down on his
uncovered coal-black hair; she spied some white threads
in it. Aye, he must be near thirty-two years old—but he
bore himself like a mischievous boy. She knew she would
not be able to tell him of her trouble—time enough when
he saw it for himself. Laughing tenderness streamed
through her heart, over the hard little spot of anger at its
core, like a glittering river flowing over stones.</p>
<p class="c015">She loved him above all on earth—her soul was filled
<span class="pageno" id="Page_300">300</span>with her love, though all the time she saw and remembered
all those other things. How ill this gallant in the
fine red surcoat, with silver spurs on heel and belt adorned
with gold, suited with the busy harvest-time of Jörundgaard.—She
marked well, too, that her father came not
up to the farm, though her mother had sent Ramborg down
to the river to bear him word of the guest that was come.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend stood beside her and passed his arm around her
shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“Can you believe it!” he said joyfully, “Seems it not
marvellous to you—that ’tis for our wedding, all this toil and
bustle?”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin gave him a kiss and thrust him aside—then
turned to basting the birds and bade him stand out of the
way. No, she would not say it—</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">It was not till supper-time that Lavrans came back to
the farm—along with the other harvesters. He was clad
much like his workmen, in an undyed wadmal coat cut off
at the knees and loose breeches reaching to the ankles;
he walked barefoot, with his scythe over his shoulder.
There was naught in his dress to mark him off from the
serving-men, save the leathern shoulder-piece that made
a perch for the hawk he bore on his left shoulder. He
led Ramborg by the hand.</p>
<p class="c015">He greeted his son-in-law heartily enough, begging him
to forgive that he had not come before—’twas that they
must push on with the farm work as hard as they could,
for he himself had a journey to make to the market town
between the hay and the corn harvests. But when Erlend
told the errand he had come on, as they sat at the supper-board,
Lavrans grew something out of humour.</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas impossible he should spare carts and horses for
such work at this time. Erlend answered: he had brought
four pack-horses with him. But Lavrans said there would
be three cartloads at the least. Besides, the maid must
<span class="pageno" id="Page_301">301</span>have her wearing apparel with her here. And the bed-furniture
that Kristin was to have with her, they would
need here too for the wedding, so many guests as they would
have in the house.</p>
<p class="c015">Well, well, said Erlend. Doubtless some way could be
found to have the goods sent through in the autumn. But
he had been glad, and had thought it seemed a wise counsel,
when the Abbot had proffered to have the goods brought
in the Church galleass. The Abbot had reminded him of
their kinship. “They are all ready now to remember
that,” said Erlend, smiling. His father-in-law’s displeasure
seemed not to trouble him in the least.</p>
<p class="c015">But in the end it was agreed that Erlend should be given
the loan of a cart and should take away a cartload of the
things Kristin would need most when first she came to her
new home.</p>
<p class="c015">The day after they were busy with the packing. The
big and the little loom the mother thought might go at
once—Kristin would scarce have time for weaving much
more before the wedding. Ragnfrid and her daughter cut
off the web that was on the loom. It was undyed wadmal,
but of the finest, softest wool, with unwoven tufts of black
sheep’s wool that made a pattern of spots. Kristin and
her mother rolled up the stuff and laid it in the leather
sack. Kristin thought: ’twould make good warm swaddling-cloths—and
right fair ones, too, with blue or red
bands wrapped round them.</p>
<p class="c015">The sewing-chair, too, that Arne had once made her, was
to be sent. Kristin took out of the box-seat all the things
Erlend had given her from time to time. She showed her
mother the blue velvet cloak patterned in red that she
was to wear at the bridal, on the ride to church. The
mother turned it about and about, and felt the stuff and
the fur lining.</p>
<p class="c015">“A costly cloak, indeed,” said Ragnfrid. “When was it
Erlend gave you this?”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_302">302</span>“He gave it me when I was at Nonneseter,” said her
daughter.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s bride-chest, that held all the goods her mother
had gathered together and saved up for her since she was
a little child, was emptied and packed anew. Its sides
and cover were all carved in squares, with a leaping beast
or a bird amidst leaves in each square. The wedding-dress
Ragnfrid laid away in one of her own chests. It was not
quite ready yet, though they had sewed on it all winter.
It was of scarlet silk, cut to sit very close to the body.
Kristin thought: ’twould be all too tight across the breast
now.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Toward evening the whole load stood ready, firmly bound
under the wagon-tilt. Erlend was to set forth early the
next morning.</p>
<p class="c015">He stood with Kristin leaning over the courtyard gate,
looking northward to where a blue-black storm-cloud filled
the Dale. Thunder was rolling far off in the mountains—but
southward the green fields and the river lay in yellow,
burning sunshine.</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you the storm that day in the woods at Gerdarud?”
he asked softly, playing with her fingers.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin nodded and tried to smile. The air was so heavy
and close—her head ached, and at every breath she took
her skin grew damp with sweat.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans came across to the two as they stood by the
gate, and spoke of the storm. ’Twas but rarely it did
much harm down here in the parish—but God knew if they
should not hear of cattle and horses killed up in the mountains.</p>
<p class="c015">It was black as night above the church up on the hillside.
A lightning flash showed them a troop of horses
standing uneasily huddled together on the green-sward outside
the church gate. Lavrans thought they could scarce
belong here in the parish—rather must they be horses from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_303">303</span>Dovre that had been running loose up on the hills below
Jetta; but yet he had a mind to go up and look at them,
he shouted through a peal of thunder—there might be some
of his among them—</p>
<p class="c015">A fearful lightning-flash tore the darkness above the
church—the thunder crashed and bellowed so as to deafen
them to all other sounds. The cluster of horses burst asunder,
scattering over the hill-slopes beneath the mountain ridge.
All three of them crossed themselves—</p>
<p class="c015">Then came another flash; it was as though the heavens
split asunder right above them, a mighty snow-white flame
swooped down upon them—the three were thrown against
each other, and stood with shut, blinded eyes, and a smell
in their nostrils as of burning stone—while the crashing
thunder rent their ears.</p>
<p class="c015">“Saint Olav, help us!” said Lavrans in a low voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“Look! the birch—the birch,” shouted Erlend; the great
birch-tree in the field near by seemed to totter—and a huge
bough parted from the tree and sank to the ground, leaving
a great gash in the trunk.</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you ’twill catch fire—Jesus Kristus! The churchroof
is alight!” shouted Lavrans.</p>
<p class="c015">They stood and gazed—no—yes! Red flames were darting
out among the shingles beneath the ridge-turret.</p>
<p class="c015">Both men rushed back across the courtyard. Lavrans
tore open the doors of all the houses he came to and
shouted to those inside; the house-folk came swarming out.</p>
<p class="c015">“Bring axes, bring axes—timber axes,” he cried, “and
bill-hooks”—he ran on to the stables. In a moment he came
out leading Guldsveinen by the mane; he sprang on the
horse’s bare back and dashed off up the hill, with the
great broad-axe in his hand. Erlend rode close behind
him—all the men followed; some were a-horseback, but
some could not master the terrified beasts, and giving up,
ran on afoot. Last came Ragnfrid and all the women on
the place with pails and buckets.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_304">304</span>None seemed to heed the storm any longer. By the light
of the flashes they could see folk streaming out of the
houses further down the valley. Sira Eirik was far up
the hill already, running with his house-folk behind him.
There was a thunder of horses’ hoofs on the ridge below—some
men galloped past, turning white, appalled faces
toward their burning church.</p>
<p class="c015">It was blowing a little from the southeast. The fire had
a strong hold on the north wall; on the west the entrance
door was blocked already. But it had not caught yet on
the south side nor on the apse.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin and the women from Jörundgaard came into
the graveyard south of the church at a place where the
fence was broken.</p>
<p class="c015">The huge red glare lighted up the grove of trees north
of the church and the green by it where there were bars
to tie the horses to. None could come thither for the glowing
heat—the great cross stood alone out there, bathed in
the light of the flames. It looked as though it lived and
moved.</p>
<p class="c015">Through the hissing and roar of the flames sounded the
thudding of axes against the staves of the south wall.
There were men in the cloister-way hewing and hammering
at the wall, while others tried to tear down the cloister itself.
Someone called out to the Jörundgaard women that Lavrans
and a few other men had followed Sira Eirik into the
church, and now ’twas high time to cut a passage through
the south wall—small tongues of flame were peeping out
among the shingles here too; and should the wind go round
or die down, the fire would take hold on the whole church.</p>
<p class="c015">To think of putting out the fire was vain; there was no
time to make a chain down to the river; but at Ragnfrid’s
bidding the women made a line and passed water along
from the little beck that ran by the roadside—it was but
little to throw on the south wall and over the men working
there. Many of the women sobbed and wept the while, in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_305">305</span>terror for the men who had made their way into the burning
building, and in sorrow for their church.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin stood foremost in the line of women handing
along the pails—she gazed breathless at the burning church—they
were both there, inside—her father—and surely
Erlend too.</p>
<p class="c015">The torn-down pillars of the cloister-way lay in a tangled
mass of timber and shingles from its roof. The men were
attacking the inner wall of staves now with all their might—a
group of them had lifted up a great log and were battering
the wall with it.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend and one of his men came out of the little door
in the south wall of the choir, carrying between them the
great chest from the sacristy—the chest Eirik was used to
sit on when he heard confession. Erlend and the man
flung the chest out into the churchyard.</p>
<p class="c015">He shouted out something, but Kristin could not hear; he
dashed on at once into the cloister-way. Nimble as a cat
he seemed as he ran—he had thrown off his outer garments
and had naught on him but shirt, breeches and hose.</p>
<p class="c015">The others took up his shout—the choir and the sacristy
were burning; none could pass from the nave to the south-door
any longer—the fire had blocked both ways of escape.
Some of the staves in the wall had been splintered by the
ram—Erlend had seized a fire-hook and with it he tugged
and wrenched at the wreckage of the staves—he and those
with him tore a hole in the side of the church, while other
folks cried to take care, for the roof might fall and shut
in the men inside; the shingle roof on this side too was
burning hard now, and the heat had grown till ’twas scarce
to be borne.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend burst through the hole and helped out Sira Eirik.
The priest came bearing the holy vessels from the altars
in the skirt of his gown.</p>
<p class="c015">A young boy followed, with one hand over his face and
the other holding the tall processional cross lance-wise in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_306">306</span>front of him. Lavrans came next. He kept his eyes shut
against the smoke—he staggered under the weight of the
great crucifix, which he bore in his arms; it was much
taller than the man himself.</p>
<p class="c015">Folk ran forward and helped them out and into the
churchyard. Sira Eirik stumbled and fell on his knees,
and the altar vessels rolled out down the slope. The silver
dove flew open and the Host fell out—the priest took it up,
brushed the soil off it and kissed it, sobbing aloud; he
kissed the gilded head, too, that had stood on the altar with
shreds of the nails and hair of Saint Olav in it.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans Björgulfsön still stood holding up the Holy
Rood. His arm lay along the arms of the cross; his head
was bowed against the shoulder of the Christ-figure; it
seemed as though the Redeemer bent his fair, sorrowful
face over the man to pity and to comfort.</p>
<p class="c015">The roof on the north side of the church had begun to
fall in by bits—a burning piece from a falling beam was
hurled outwards and struck the great bell in the belfry by
the churchyard gate. The bell gave out a deep sobbing
note, which died in a long wail that was drowned in the
roaring of the flames.</p>
<p class="c015">None had paid heed to the weather all this time—the
whole had lasted indeed no long time, but whether short or
long scarce any could have told. The thunder and lightning
had passed now far down the Dale; the rain, that had
begun some time back, fell ever the more heavily, and the
wind had died down.</p>
<p class="c015">But of a sudden it was as though a sheet of flame shot
up from the groundsill of the building—a moment, and
with a mounting roar the fire had swallowed up the church
from end to end.</p>
<p class="c015">The people scattered, rushing away to escape the devouring
heat. Erlend was at Kristin’s side on the instant, dragging
her away down the hill. The whole man smelt of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_307">307</span>burning—when she stroked his head and face her hand
came away full of burnt hair.</p>
<p class="c015">They could not hear each other’s voices for the roaring
of the fire. But she saw that his eyebrows were burnt off
to the roots; he had burns on his face, and great holes were
burnt in his shirt. He laughed as he dragged her along
with him after the others.</p>
<p class="c015">All the folk followed the old priest as he went weeping,
with Lavrans Björgulfsön bearing the crucifix.</p>
<p class="c015">At the foot of the churchyard Lavrans set the Rood
from him up against a tree, and sank down to a seat on
the wreckage of the fence. Sira Eirik was sitting there
already—he stretched out his arms toward the burning
church:</p>
<p class="c015">“Farewell, farewell, thou Olav’s-Church; God bless thee,
thou my Olav’s-Church; God bless thee for every hour I
have chanted in thee and said Mass in thee—thou Olav’s-Church,
good-night, good-night—”</p>
<p class="c015">The church-folk wept aloud with their priest. The rain
streamed down on the groups of people, but none thought
of seeking shelter. Nor did it seem to check the fierce
burning of the tarred woodwork—brands and glowing
shingles were tossed out on every side. Then, suddenly,
the ridge-turret crashed down into the fiery furnace, sending
a great shower of sparks high into the air.</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat with one hand over his face; the other arm
lay in his lap, and Kristin saw that the sleeve was all
bloody from the shoulder down, and blood ran down over
his fingers. She went to him and touched his arm.</p>
<p class="c015">“Not much is amiss, methinks—there fell somewhat on
my shoulder,” he said, looking up. He was white to the
lips. “Ulvhild,” he murmured in anguish, gazing into the
burning pile.</p>
<p class="c015">Sira Eirik heard the word and laid a hand on his
shoulder:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_308">308</span>“’Twill not wake your child, Lavrans—she will sleep
none the less sound for the burning above her bed. <i>She</i>
hath not lost her soul’s home, as we others have lost ours
this night.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin hid her face on Erlend’s breast, and stood there
feeling the grasp of his arm round her shoulders. Then
she heard her father asking for his wife.</p>
<p class="c015">Someone answered that a woman had fallen in labour
from the fright; they had borne her down to the parsonage,
and Ragnfrid had gone with her there.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Kristin called to mind again what she had clean
forgotten ever since they saw that the church was afire.
She should not have looked on this. There lived a man in
the south of the parish who had a red stain over half his
face; ’twas said he was thus because his mother had looked
at a burning house while she was big with him. Dear,
Holy Virgin Mother, she prayed in her heart, let not my
child have been marred by this—</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The day after, the whole parish was called to meet on
the church-green to take counsel how best to build up the
church anew.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sought out Sira Eirik at Romundgaard before the
time set for the meeting. She asked the priest if he deemed
she should take this as a sign. Maybe ’twas God’s will
that she should say to her father she was unworthy to wear
the bridal crown; that it were more seemly she should be
given in marriage to Erlend Nikulaussön without feasting,
or bridal honours.</p>
<p class="c015">But Sira Eirik flew up at her with eyes glistening with
wrath:</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you that God cares so much how you sluts may
fly about and cast yourselves away, that He would burn up
a fair, venerable church for your sake? Leave you your
sinful pride, and bring not on your mother and Lavrans
such a sorrow as they would scarce win through for many
<span class="pageno" id="Page_309">309</span>a day. If you wear not the crown with honour on your
honourable day—the worse for you; but the more need
have you and Erlend of all the rites of the Church when
ye are brought together. Each and all of us have sins
to answer for; ’tis therefore, I trow, that this visitation is
come upon us all. See you to it that you mend your life,
and that you help to build up our church again, both you
and Erlend.”</p>
<p class="c015">It was in Kristin’s mind that he knew not all, for that
yet she had not told him of this last thing that was come
upon her—but she rested content and said no more.</p>
<p class="c015">She went with the men to the meeting. Lavrans came
with his arm in a sling, and Erlend had many burns on his
face; he was ill to look upon, but he laughed it off. None
of the wounds were large, and he said he hoped they would
not spoil his face too much when he came to be a bridegroom.
He stood up after Lavrans and promised four
marks of silver as an offering to the church, and for his betrothed,
with Lavrans’ assent, land worth sixty cows from
her holdings in the parish.</p>
<p class="c015">It was found needful for Erlend to stay a week at Jörundgaard
by reason of his burns. Kristin saw that ’twas as
though Lavrans had come to like his son-in-law better since
the night of the fire; the men seemed now to be good friends
enough. She thought: maybe her father might grow to
like Erlend Nikulaussön so well that he would not judge
them too strictly, and would not take the matter so hardly
as she had feared when the time came when he must know
that they had transgressed against him.</p>
<div class="pbb">
<hr class="pb c005"/>
</div>
<h3 class="c013">8</h3>
<p class="drop-capa0_25_0_7 c014">The year proved a rarely good one over all the north
part of the Dale. The hay crop was heavy, and it was
got in dry; the folk came home from the sæters in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_310">310</span>autumn with great store of dairy-stuff and full and
fat flocks and herds—they had been mercifully spared from
wild beasts, too, this year. The corn stood tall and thick
as few folks could call to mind having seen it before—it
grew full-eared and ripened well, and the weather was fair
as heart could wish. Between St. Bartholomew’s and the
Virgin’s Birthfeast, the time when night-frosts were most
to be feared, it rained a little and was mild and cloudy,
but thereafter the time of harvest went by with sun and
wind and mild, misty nights. The week after Michaelmas
most of the corn had been garnered all over the parish.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">At Jörundgaard all folks were toiling and moiling, making
ready for the great wedding. The last two months
Kristin had been so busy from morning to night that she
had but little time to trouble over aught but her work.
She saw that her bosom had filled out; the small pink
nipples were grown brown, and they were tender as smarting
hurts when she had to get out of bed in the cold—but it
passed over when she had worked herself warm, and after
that she had no thought but of all she must get done before
evening. When now and again she was forced to straighten
up her back and stand and rest a little, she felt that the
burden she bore was growing heavy—but to look on she
was still slim and slender as she had ever been. She
passed her hands down her long shapely thighs. No, she
would not grieve over it now. Sometimes a faint creeping
longing would come over her with the thought: like enough
in a month or so she might feel the child quick within
her—By that time she would be at Husaby.—Maybe
Erlend would be glad—She shut her eyes and fixed her
teeth on her betrothal ring—then she saw before her Erlend’s
face, pale and moved, as he stood in the hall here in
the winter and said the words of espousal with a loud clear
voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“So be God my witness and these men standing here, that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_311">311</span>I Erlend Nikulaussön do espouse Kristin Lavransdatter according
to the laws of God and men, on such conditions as
here have been spoken before these witnesses standing hereby.
That I shall have thee to my wife and thou shalt
have me to thy husband, so long as we two do live, to
dwell together in wedlock, with all such fellowship as
God’s law and the law of the land do appoint.”</p>
<p class="c015">As she ran on errands from house to house across the
farm-place, she stayed a moment—the rowan trees were
so thick with berries this year—’twould be a snowy winter.
The sun shone over the pale stubble fields where the
corn sheaves stood piled on their stakes. If this weather
might only hold over the wedding!</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Lavrans stood firmly to it that his daughter should be
wedded in church. It was fixed, therefore, that the wedding
should be in the chapel at Sundbu. On the Saturday
the bridal train was to ride over the hills to Vaage; they
were to lie for the night at Sundbu and the neighbouring
farms, and ride back on Sunday after the wedding-mass.
The same evening after Vespers, when the holy day was
ended, the wedding feast was to be held, and Lavrans
was to give his daughter away to Erlend. And after midnight
the bride and bridegroom were to be put to bed.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">On Friday, after noon, Kristin stood in the upper hall
balcony, watching the bridal train come riding from the
north, past the charred ruins of the church on the hillside.
It was Erlend coming with all his groomsmen; she
strained her eyes to pick him out among the others. They
must not see each other—no man must see her now before
she was led forth to-morrow in her bridal dress.</p>
<p class="c015">Where the ways divided, a few women left the throng
and took the road to Jörundgaard. The men rode on toward
Laugarbru; they were to sleep there that night.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin went down to meet the comers. She felt wearied
<span class="pageno" id="Page_312">312</span>after the bath, and the skin of her head was sore from the
strong lye her mother had used to wash her hair, that it
might shine fair and bright on the morrow.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild slipped down from her saddle into Lavrans’
arms. How can she keep so light and young, thought
Kristin. Her son Sir Munan’s wife, Lady Katrin, might
have passed for older than she; a big plump dame, with
dull and hueless skin and eyes. Strange, thought Kristin;
she is ill-favoured and he is unfaithful, and yet folks say
they live well and kindly together. Then there were two
daughters of Sir Baard Petersön, one married and one unmarried.
They were neither comely nor ill-favoured; they
looked honest and kind, but held themselves something stiffly
in the strange company. Lavrans thanked them courteously
that they had been pleased to honour this wedding at the
cost of so far a journey so late in the year.</p>
<p class="c015">“Erlend was bred in our father’s house, when he was
a boy,” said the elder, moving forward to greet Kristin.</p>
<p class="c015">But now two youths came riding into the farm-place at
a sharp trot—they leaped from their horses and rushed
laughing after Kristin, who ran indoors and hid herself.
They were Trond Gjesling’s two young sons, fair and likely
lads. They had brought the bridal crown with them from
Sundbu in a casket. Trond and his wife were not to come
till Sunday, when they would join the bridal train after the
mass.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin fled into the hearth-room; and Lady Aashild,
coming after, laid her hands on the girl’s shoulders, and
drew down her face to hers to kiss it.</p>
<p class="c015">“Glad am I that I live to see this day,” said Lady
Aashild.</p>
<p class="c015">She saw how thin they were grown, Kristin’s hands,
that she held in hers. She saw that all else about her was
grown thin, but that her bosom was high and full. All the
features of the face were grown smaller and finer than
before; the temples seemed as though sunken in the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_313">313</span>shadow of the heavy, damp hair. The girl’s cheeks were
round no longer, and her fresh hue was faded. But her
eyes were grown much larger and darker.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild kissed her again:</p>
<p class="c015">“I see well you have had much to strive against, Kristin,”
she said. “To-night will I give you a sleepy drink, that
you may be rested and fresh to-morrow.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin’s lips began to quiver.</p>
<p class="c015">“Hush,” said Lady Aashild, patting her hand. “I joy
already that I shall deck you out to-morrow—none hath
seen a fairer bride, I trow, than you shall be to-morrow.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Lavrans rode over to Laugarbru to feast with his guests
who were housed there.</p>
<p class="c015">The men could not praise the food enough—better
Friday food than this a man could scarce find in the richest
monastery. There was rye-meal porridge, boiled beans
and white bread—for fish they had only trout, salted and
fresh, and fat dried halibut.</p>
<p class="c015">As time went on and the men drank deeper, they grew
ever more wanton of mood, and the jests broken on the
bridegroom’s head ever more gross. All Erlend’s groomsmen
were much younger than he—his equals in age and
his friends were all long since wedded men. The darling
jest among the groomsmen now was that he was so aged
a man and yet was to mount the bridal bed for the first
time. Some of Erlend’s older kinsmen, who yet kept
their wits, sat in dread, at each new sally, that the talk
would come in upon matters it were best not to touch.
Sir Baard of Hestnæs kept an eye on Lavrans. The host
drank deep, but it seemed not that the ale made him more
joyful—he sat in the high-seat, his face growing more and
more strained, even as his eyes grew more fixed. But
Erlend, who sat on his father-in-law’s right hand, answered
in kind the wanton jests flung at him, and laughed much;
his face was flushed red and his eyes sparkled.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_314">314</span>Of a sudden Lavrans flew out:</p>
<p class="c015">“That cart, son-in-law—while I remember—what have
you done with the cart you had of me on loan in the summer?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Cart—?” said Erlend.</p>
<p class="c015">“Have you forgot already that you had a cart on loan
from me in the summer—God knows ’twas so good a
cart I look not ever to see a better, for I saw to it myself
when ’twas making in my own smithy on the farm. You
promised and you swore—I take God to witness, and my
house-folk know it besides—you gave your word to bring
it back to me—but that word you have not kept—”</p>
<p class="c015">Some of the guests called out that this was no matter to
talk of now, but Lavrans smote the board with his fist
and swore that he would know what Erlend had done with
his cart.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh like enough it lies still at the farm at Næs, where
we took boat out to Veöy,” said Erlend lightly. “I thought
not ’twas meant so nicely. See you, father-in-law, thus it
was—’twas a long and toilsome journey with a heavy-laden
cart over the hills, and when we were come down to the
fjord, none of my men had a mind to bring the cart all the
way back here, and then journey north again over the hills
to Trondheim. So we thought we might let it be there for
a time—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Now, may the devil fly off with me from where I sit
this very hour, if I have ever heard of your like,” Lavrans
burst out. “Is this how things are ordered in your house—doth
the word lie with you or with your men, where they
are to go or not to go—?”</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend shrugged his shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“True it is, much hath been as it should not have been
in my household—But now will I have the cart sent
south to you again, when Kristin and I are come thither—Dear
my father-in-law,” said he, smiling and holding out
his hand, “be assured, ’twill be changed times with all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_315">315</span>things, and with me too, when once I have brought Kristin
home to be mistress of my house. ’Twas an ill thing, this
of the cart. But I promise you, this shall be the last time
you have cause of grief against me.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Dear Lavrans,” said Baard Petersön, “forgive him in
this small matter—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Small matter or great—” began Lavrans—but checked
himself, and took Erlend’s hand.</p>
<p class="c015">Soon after he made the sign for the feast to break up,
and the guests sought their sleeping-places.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">On the Saturday before noon all the women and girls
were busy in the old store-house loft-room, some making
ready the bridal bed, some dressing and adorning the bride.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid had chosen this house for the bride-house, in
part for its having the smallest loft-room—they could
make room for many more guests in the new store-house
loft, the one they had used themselves in summer
time to sleep in when Kristin was a little child, before Lavrans
had set up the great new dwelling-house, where they
lived now both summer and winter. But besides this,
there was no fairer house on the farm than the old store-house,
since Lavrans had had it mended and set in order—it
had been nigh falling to the ground when they moved
in to Jörundgaard. It was adorned with the finest woodcarving
both outside and in, and if the loft-room were not
great, ’twas the easier to hang it richly with rugs and
tapestries and skins.</p>
<p class="c015">The bridal bed stood ready made, with silk-covered pillows;
fine hangings made as it were a tent about it; over
the skins and rugs on the bed was spread a broidered silken
coverlid. Ragnfrid and some other women were busy
now hanging tapestries on the timber walls and laying cushions
in order on the benches.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin sat in a great arm-chair that had been brought
up thither. She was clad in her scarlet bridal robe. Great
<span class="pageno" id="Page_316">316</span>silver brooches held it together over her bosom, and
fastened the yellow silk shift showing in the neck-opening;
golden armlets glittered on the yellow silken sleeves. A
silver-gilt belt was passed thrice around her waist, and on
her neck and bosom lay neck-chain over neck-chain, the
uppermost her father’s old gold chain with the great reliquary
cross. Her hands, lying in her lap, were heavy
with rings.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild stood behind her chair, brushing her heavy,
gold-brown hair out to all sides.</p>
<p class="c015">“To-morrow shall you spread it loose for the last time,”
she said smiling, as she wound the red and green silk
cords that were to hold up the crown, around Kristin’s
head—Then the women came thronging round the
bride.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid and Gyrid of Skog took the great bridal crown
of the Gjesling kin from the board. It was gilt all over,
the points ended in alternate crosses and clover-leaves, and
the circlet was set with great rock-crystals.</p>
<p class="c015">They pressed it down on the bride’s head. Ragnfrid
was pale, and her hands were shaking, as she did it.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin rose slowly to her feet. Jesus! how heavy
’twas to bear up all this gold and silver—Then Lady
Aashild took her by the hand and led her forward to a
great tub of water—while the bridesmaids flung open the
door to the outer sunlight, so that the light in the room
should be bright.</p>
<p class="c015">“Look now at yourself in the water, Kristin,” said Lady
Aashild, and Kristin bent over the tub. She caught a
glimpse of her own face rising up white through the water;
it came so near that she saw the golden crown above it.
Round about, many shadows, bright and dark, were stirring
in the mirror—there was somewhat she was on the
brink of remembering—then ’twas as though she was
swooning away—she caught at the rim of the tub before
her. At that moment Lady Aashild laid her hand on hers,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_317">317</span>and drove her nails so hard into the flesh, that Kristin
came to herself with the pain.</p>
<p class="c015">Blasts of a great horn were heard from down by the
bridge. Folk shouted up from the courtyard that the
bridegroom was coming with his train. The women led
Kristin out onto the balcony.</p>
<p class="c015">In the courtyard was a tossing mass of horses in state
trappings and people in festival apparel, all shining and
glittering in the sun. Kristin looked out beyond it all, far
out into the Dale. The valley of her home lay bright
and still beneath a thin misty-blue haze; up above the haze
rose the mountains, grey with screes and black with forest,
and the sun poured down its light into the great bowl of
the valley from a cloudless sky.</p>
<p class="c015">She had not marked it before, but the trees had shed all
their leaves—the groves around shone naked and silver-grey.
Only the alder thickets along the river had a little
faded green on their topmost branches, and here and there
a birch had a few yellow-white leaves clinging to its outermost
twigs. But, for the most the trees were almost bare—all
but the rowans; they were still bright, with red-brown
leaves around the clusters of their blood-red berries.
In the still, warm day a faint mouldering smell of autumn
rose from the ashen covering of fallen leaves that strewed
the ground all about.</p>
<p class="c015">Had it not been for the rowans, it might have been early
spring. And the stillness too—but this was an autumn
stillness, deathly still. When the horn-blasts died away,
no other sound was heard in all the valley but the tinkling
of bells from the stubble fields and fallows where the
beasts wandered, grazing.</p>
<p class="c015">The river was shrunken small, its roar sunk to a murmur;
it was but a few strands of water running amidst
banks of sand and great stretches of white round boulders.
No noise of becks from the hillsides—the autumn had been
so dry. The fields all around still gleamed wet—but ’twas
<span class="pageno" id="Page_318">318</span>but the wetness that oozes up from the earth in autumn, howsoever
warm the days may be, and however clear the air.</p>
<p class="c015">The crowd that filled the farm-place fell apart to make
way for the bridegroom’s train. Straightway the young
groomsmen came riding forward—there went a stir among
the women in the balcony.</p>
<p class="c015">Lady Aashild was standing by the bride:</p>
<p class="c015">“Bear you well now, Kristin,” said she, “’twill not be
long now till you are safe under the linen coif.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin nodded helplessly. She felt how deathly white
her face must be.</p>
<p class="c015">“Methinks I am all too pale a bride,” she said in a low
voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“You are the fairest bride,” said Lady Aashild; “and
there comes Erlend, riding—fairer pair than you twain
would be far to seek.”</p>
<p class="c015">Now Erlend himself rode forward under the balcony. He
sprang lightly from his horse, unhindered by his heavy,
flowing garments. He seemed to Kristin so fair that ’twas
pain to look on him.</p>
<p class="c015">He was in dark raiment, clad in a slashed silken coat
falling to the feet, leaf-brown of hue and inwoven with
black and white. About his waist he had a gold-bossed
belt, and at his left thigh hung a sword with gold on hilt
and sheath. Back over his shoulders fell a heavy dark-blue
velvet cloak, and pressed down on his coal-black hair
he wore a black French cap of silk that stood out at both
sides in puckered wings, and ended in two long streamers,
whereof one was thrown from his left shoulder right across
his breast and out behind over the other arm.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend bowed low before his bride as she stood above;
then went up to her horse and stood by it with his hand
on the saddle-bow, while Lavrans went up the stairs. A
strange dizzy feeling came over Kristin at the sight of all
this splendour—in this solemn garment of green velvet,
falling to his feet, her father might have been some
<span class="pageno" id="Page_319">319</span>stranger. And her mother’s face, under the linen coif,
showed ashen-grey against the red of her silken dress.
Ragnfrid came forward and laid the cloak about her
daughter’s shoulders.</p>
<p class="c015">Then Lavrans took the bride’s hand and led her down
to Erlend. The bridegroom lifted her to the saddle, and
himself mounted. They stayed their horses, side by side,
these two, beneath the bridal balcony, while the train
began to form and ride out through the courtyard gate.
First the priests: Sira Eirik, Sira Tormod from Ulvsvolden,
and a Brother of the Holy Cross from Hamar, a friend of
Lavrans. Then came the groomsmen and the bridesmaids,
pair by pair. And now ’twas for Erlend and her to ride
forth. After them came the bride’s parents, the kinsmen,
friends and guests, in a long line down betwixt the fences
to the highway. Their road for a long way onward was
strewn with clusters of rowan-berries, branches of pine,
and the last white dogfennel of autumn, and folk stood
thick along the waysides where the train passed by,
greeting them with a great shouting.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">On the Sunday, just after sunset, the bridal train rode
back to Jörundgaard. Through the first falling folds of
darkness the bonfires shone out red from the courtyard of
the bridal-house. Minstrels and fiddlers were singing and
making drums and fiddles speak as the crowd of riders
drew near to the warm red glare of the fires.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin came near to falling her length on the ground
when Erlend lifted her from her horse beneath the balcony
of the upper hall.</p>
<p class="c015">“Twas so cold upon the hills,” she whispered—“I am
so weary—” She stood for a moment—and when she
climbed the stairs to the loft-room she swayed and tottered
at each step.</p>
<p class="c015">Up in the hall the half-frozen wedding-guests were soon
warmed up again. The many candles burning in the room
<span class="pageno" id="Page_320">320</span>gave out heat; smoking hot dishes of food were borne
around, and wine, mead and strong ale circled about.
The loud hum of voices, and the noise of many eating
sounded like a far off roaring in Kristin’s ears.</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed as she sat there she would never be warm
through again. In a while her cheeks began to burn, but
her feet were still unthawed, and shudders of cold ran
down her back. All the heavy gold that was on her head
and body forced her to lean forward as she sat in the
high-seat by Erlend’s side.</p>
<p class="c015">Every time her bridegroom drank to her, she could not
keep her eyes from the red stains and patches that stood
out on his face so sharply as he began to grow warm after
his ride in the cold. They were the marks left by the
burns of last summer.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">The horror had come upon her last evening, when they
sat over the supper-board at Sundbu, and she met Björn
Gunnarsön’s lightless eyes fixed on her and Erlend—unwinking,
unwavering eyes. They had dressed up Sir
Björn in knightly raiment—he looked like a dead man
brought to life by an evil spell.</p>
<p class="c015">At night she had lain with Lady Aashild—the bridegroom’s
nearest kinswoman in the wedding company.</p>
<p class="c015">“What is amiss with you, Kristin?” said Lady Aashild,
a little sharply. “Now is the time for you to bear up
stiffly to the end—not give way thus.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I am thinking,” said Kristin, cold with dread, “on all
them we have brought to sorrow, that we might see this
day.”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Tis not joy alone, I trow, that you two have had,”
said Lady Aashild. “Not Erlend at the least. And methinks
it has been worse still for you.”</p>
<p class="c015">“I am thinking on his helpless children,” said the bride
again. “I am wondering if they know their father is
drinking to-day at his wedding feast.—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_321">321</span>“Think on your own child,” said the Lady. “Be glad
that you are drinking at your wedding with him who is its
father.”</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin lay awhile, weak and giddy. ’Twas so strange
to hear that name, that had filled her heart and mind each
day for three months and more, and whereof yet she had
not dared speak a word to a living soul. It was but for
a little though, that this helped her.</p>
<p class="c015">“I am thinking of her who had to pay with her life,
because she held Erlend dear,” she whispered, shivering.</p>
<p class="c015">“Well if you come not to pay with your life yourself,
ere you are half a year older,” said Lady Aashild
harshly. “Be glad while you may—</p>
<p class="c015">“What shall I say to you, Kristin?” said the old woman
in a while, despairingly. “Have you clean lost courage
this day of all days? Soon enough will it be required
of you twain that you shall pay for all you have done
amiss—have no fear that it will not be so.”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">But Kristin felt as though all things in her soul were
slipping, slipping—as though all were toppling down
that she had built up since that day of horror at Haugen,
in that first time when, wild and blind with fear, she had
thought but of holding out one day more, and one day
more. And she had held out till her load grew lighter—and
at last grew even light, when she had thrown off all
thought but this one thought: that now their wedding-day
was coming at last, Erlend’s wedding-day at last.</p>
<p class="c015">But, when she and Erlend knelt together in the wedding-mass,
all around her seemed but some trickery of the
sight—the tapers, the pictures, the glittering vessels, the
priests in their copes and white gowns. All those who
had known her where she had lived before—they seemed
like visions of a dream, standing there, close-packed in
the church in their unwonted garments. But Sir Björn
stood against a pillar, looking at those two with his dead
<span class="pageno" id="Page_322">322</span>eyes, and it seemed to her that that other who was dead
must needs have come back with him, on his arm.</p>
<p class="c015">She tried to look up at Saint Olav’s picture—he stood
there red and white and comely, leaning on his axe, treading
his own sinful human nature underfoot—but her
glance would ever go back to Sir Björn; and nigh to him
she saw Eline Ormsdatter’s dead face, looking unmoved
upon her and Erlend. They had trampled her underfoot
that they might come hither—and she grudged it not to
them.</p>
<p class="c015">The dead woman had arisen and flung off her all the
great stones that Kristin had striven to heap up above her.
Erlend’s wasted youth, his honour and his welfare, his
friends’ good graces, his soul’s health. The dead woman
had shaken herself free from them all. “He would have
me and I would have him; you would have him and he
would have you,” said Eline. “I have paid—and he must
pay and you must pay when your time comes. When the
time of sin is fulfilled, it brings forth death—”</p>
<p class="c015">It seemed to her she was kneeling with Erlend on a cold
stone. He knelt there with the red, burnt patches on his
pale face; she knelt under the heavy bridal crown, and
felt the dull, crushing weight within her—the burden of
sin that she bore. She had played and wantoned with her
sin, had measured it as in a childish game. Holy Virgin—now
the time was nigh when it should lie full-born before
her, look at her with living eyes; show her on itself the
brands of sin, the hideous deformity of sin; strike in hate
with misshapen hands at its mother’s breast. When she
had borne her child, when she saw the marks of her sin
upon it and yet loved it as she had loved her sin, then
would the game be played to an end.</p>
<p class="c015">Kristin thought what if she shrieked aloud now, a
shriek that would cut through the song and the deep
voices intoning the mass, and echo out over the people’s
heads? Would she be rid then of Eline’s face—would
<span class="pageno" id="Page_323">323</span>there come life into the dead man’s eyes? But she
clenched her teeth together.</p>
<p class="c015">“—Holy King Olav, I cry upon thee. Above all in
Heaven I pray for help to thee, for I know thou didst love
God’s justice above all things. I call upon thee, that thou
hold thy hand over the innocent that is in my womb.
Turn away God’s wrath from the innocent; turn it upon
me; Amen, in the precious name of the Lord—”</p>
<p class="c015">“My children,” said Eline’s voice, “are <i>they</i> not guiltless?
Yet is there no place for them in the lands where Christians
dwell. Your child is begotten outside the law, even
as were my children. No rights can you claim for it in
the land you have strayed away from, any more than I for
mine—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Holy Olav! Yet do I pray for grace. Pray thou for
mercy for my son; take him beneath thy guard; so shall
I bear him to thy church on my naked feet, so shall I bear
my golden garland of maidenhood in to thee and lay it
down upon thy altar, if thou wilt but help me—amen.”</p>
<p class="c015">Her face was set hard as stone in her struggle to be
still and calm; but her whole body throbbed and quivered
as she knelt there through the holy mass that wedded her
to Erlend.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">And now, as she sat beside him in the high-seat at home,
all things around her were but as shadows in a fevered
dream.</p>
<p class="c015">There were minstrels playing on harps and fiddles in the
loft-room; and the sound of music and song rose from
the hall below and the courtyard outside. There was a
red glare of fire from without, when the door was opened
for the dishes and tankards to be borne in and out.</p>
<p class="c015">Those around the board were standing now; she was
standing up between her father and Erlend. Her father
made known with a loud voice that he had given Erlend
Nikulaussön his daughter Kristin to wife. Erlend thanked
<span class="pageno" id="Page_324">324</span>his father-in-law, and he thanked all good folk who had
come together there to honour him and his wife.</p>
<p class="c015">She was to sit down, they said—and now Erlend laid
his bridal gifts in her lap. Sira Eirik and Sir Munan
Baardsön unrolled deeds and read aloud from them concerning
the jointures and settlements of the wedded pair;
while the groomsmen stood around, with spears in their
hands, and now and again during the reading, or when
gifts and bags of money were laid on the table, smote with
the butts upon the floor.</p>
<p class="c015">The tables were cleared away; Erlend led her forth upon
the floor, and they danced together. Kristin thought:
our groomsmen and our bridesmaids—they are all too
young for us—all they that were young with us are
gone from these places; how is it we are come back hither?</p>
<p class="c015">“You are so strange, Kristin,” whispered Erlend, as they
danced. “I am afraid of you, Kristin—are you not
happy—?”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">They went from house to house and greeted their guests.
There were many lights in all the rooms, and everywhere
crowds of people drinking and singing and dancing. It
seemed to Kristin she scarce knew her home again—and
she had lost all knowledge of time—hours and the pictures
of her brain seemed strangely to float about loosely,
mingled with each other.</p>
<p class="c015">The autumn night was mild; there were minstrels in the
courtyard too, and people dancing round the bonfire.
They cried out that the bride and bridegroom must honour
them, too—and then she was dancing with Erlend on the
cold, dewy sward. She seemed to wake a little then, and
her head grew more clear.</p>
<p class="c015">Far out in the darkness a band of white mist floated above
the murmur of the river. The mountains stood around
coal-black against the star-sprinkled sky.</p>
<p class="c015">Erlend led her out of the ring of dancers—and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_325">325</span>crushed her to him in the darkness under the balcony.</p>
<p class="c015">“Not once have I had the chance to tell you—you are
so fair—so fair and so sweet. Your cheeks are red as
flames—” he pressed his cheek to hers as he spoke. “Kristin,
what is it ails you—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I am so weary, so weary,” she whispered back.</p>
<p class="c015">“Soon will we go and sleep,” answered her bridegroom,
looking up at the sky. The Milky Way had wheeled, and
now lay all but north and south. “Mind you that we have
not once slept together since that one only night I was with
you in your bower at Skog?”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Soon after, Sira Eirik shouted with a loud voice out
over the farmstead that now it was Monday. The women
came to lead the bride to bed. Kristin was so weary that
she was scarce able to struggle and hold back as ’twas fit
and seemly she should do. She let herself be seized and
led out of the loft-room by Lady Aashild and Gyrid of
Skog. The groomsmen stood at the foot of the stair with
burning torches and naked swords; they formed a ring
round the troop of women and attended Kristin across the
farm-place, and up into the old loft-room.</p>
<p class="c015">The women took off her bridal finery, piece by piece,
and laid it away. Kristin saw that over the bed-foot hung
the violet velvet robe she was to wear on the morrow, and
upon it lay a long, snow-white, finely-pleated linen cloth.
It was the wife’s linen coif. Erlend had brought it for
her; to-morrow she was to bind up her hair in a knot and
fasten the head-linen over it. It looked to her so fresh
and cool and restful.</p>
<p class="c015">At last she was standing before the bridal bed, on her
naked feet, bare-armed, clad only in the long golden-yellow
silken shift. They had set the crown on her head again—the
bridegroom was to take it off, when they two were left
alone.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid laid her hands on her daughter’s shoulders,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_326">326</span>and kissed her on the cheek—the mother’s face and hands
were strangely cold, but it was as though sobs were
struggling, deep in her breast. Then she threw back the
coverings of the bed, and bade the bride seat herself in it.
Kristin obeyed, and leaned back on the pillows heaped up
against the bed-head—she had to bend her head a little
forward to keep on the crown. Lady Aashild drew the
coverings up to the bride’s waist, and laid her hands before
her on the silken coverlid; then took her shining hair
and drew it forward over her bosom and the slender bare
upper arms.</p>
<p class="c015">Next the men led the bridegroom into the loft-room.
Munan Baardsön unclasped the golden belt and sword
from Erlend’s waist—when he leaned over to hang it on
the wall above the bed, he whispered something to the
bride—Kristin knew not what he said, but she did her best
to smile.</p>
<p class="c015">The groomsmen unlaced Erlend’s silken robe and lifted
off the long heavy garment over his head. He sat him
down in the great chair and they helped him off with his
spurs and boots—</p>
<p class="c015">Once and once only the bride found courage to look up
and meet his eyes—</p>
<p class="c015">Then began the good-nights. Before long all the
wedding-guests were gone from the loft. Last of all,
Lavrans Björgulfsön went out and shut the door of the
bride-house.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Erlend stood up, stripped off his under-clothing, and
flung it on the benches. He stood by the bed, took the
crown and the silken cords from off her hair, and laid
them away on the table. Then he came back and mounted
into the bed. Kneeling by her side he clasped her round
the head, and pressed it in against his hot naked breast,
while he kissed her forehead all along the red-streak the
crown had left on it.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_327">327</span>She threw her arms about his shoulders and sobbed
aloud—she had a sweet, wild feeling that now the horror,
the phantom visions were fading into air—now, now once
again naught was left but he and she. He lifted up her
face a moment, looked down into it, and drew his hand
down over her face and body, with a strange haste and
roughness, as though he tore away a covering:</p>
<p class="c015">“Forget,” he begged, in a fiery whisper, “forget all, my
Kristin—all but this, that you are my own wife, and I am
your own husband—”</p>
<p class="c015">With his hand he quenched the flame of the last candle,
then threw himself down beside her in the dark—he too
was sobbing now:</p>
<p class="c015">“Never have I believed it, never in all these years, that
we should see this day—”</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">Without, in the courtyard, the noise died down little by
little. Wearied with the long day’s ride, and dizzy with
much strong drink, the guests made a decent show of merry-making
a little while yet—but more and ever more of them
stole away and sought out the places where they were to
sleep.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid showed all the guests of honour to their places,
and bade them good-night. Her husband, who should have
helped her in this, was nowhere to be seen.</p>
<p class="c015">The dark courtyard was empty, save for a few small
groups of young folks—servants most of them—when at
last she stole out to find her husband and bring him with
her to his bed. She had seen as the night wore on that he
had grown very drunken.</p>
<p class="c015">She stumbled over him at last, as she crept along in her
search outside the cattle-yard—he was lying in the grass
behind the bath-house, on his face.</p>
<p class="c015">Groping in the darkness, she touched him with her hand—aye,
it was he. She thought he was asleep, and took
him by the shoulder—she must get him up off the icy-cold
<span class="pageno" id="Page_328">328</span>ground. But he was not asleep, at least, not wholly.</p>
<p class="c015">“What would you?” he asked, in a thick voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“You cannot lie here,” said his wife. She held him up,
as he stood swaying. With one hand she brushed the soil
off his velvet robe. “’Tis time we too went to rest, husband.”
She took him by the arm, and drew him, reeling,
up towards the farm-yard buildings.</p>
<p class="c015">“<i>You</i> looked not up, Ragnfrid, when you sat in the bridal
bed beneath the crown,” he said in the same voice. “Our
daughter—<i>she</i> was not so shamefast—her eyes were not
shamefast when she looked upon her bridegroom.”</p>
<p class="c015">“She has waited for him seven half-years,” said the
mother in a low voice. “No marvel if she found courage
to look up—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Nay, devil damn me if they have waited!” screamed
the man—as his wife strove fearfully to hush him.</p>
<p class="c015">They were in the narrow passage between the back of
the privy and a fence. Lavrans smote with his clenched
fist on the beam across the cess-pit:</p>
<p class="c015">“I set thee here for a scorn and for a mockery, thou
beam. I set thee here that filth might eat thee up. I set
thee here in punishment for striking down that tender little
maid of mine.—I should have set thee high above my
hall-room door; and honoured thee and thanked thee with
fairest carven ornament; because thou didst save her from
shame and from sorrow,—because ’twas thy work that my
Ulvhild died a sinless child—”</p>
<p class="c015">He turned about, reeled toward the fence and fell forward
upon it, and with his head between his arms
fell into an unquenchable passion of weeping, broken by
long, deep groans.</p>
<p class="c015">His wife took him by the shoulder.</p>
<p class="c015">“Lavrans, Lavrans!” But she could not stay his weeping.
“Husband.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, never, never, never should I have given her to that
man! God help me—I must have known it all the time—he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_329">329</span>had broken down her youth and her fairest honour. I
believed it not—nay, could I believe the like of Kristin?—but
still I knew it. And yet is she too good for this
weakling boy, that hath made waste of himself and her—had
he lured her astray ten times over, I should never
have given her to him, that he may spill yet more of her
life and her happiness—”</p>
<p class="c015">“But what other way was there?” said the mother despairingly.
“You know now, as well as I—she was his
already—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, small need was there for me to make such a
mighty to-do in giving Erlend what he had taken for himself
already,” said Lavrans. “’Tis a gallant husband she
has won—my Kristin—” He tore at the fence; then fell
again a-weeping. He had seemed to Ragnfrid as though
sobered a little, but now the fit overcame him again.</p>
<p class="c015">She deemed she could not bring him, drunken and beside
himself with despair as he was, to the bed in the
hearth-room where they should have slept—for the room
was full of guests. She looked about her—close by
stood a little barn where they kept the best hay to feed
to the horses at the spring ploughing. She went and peered
in—no one was there; she took her husband’s hand, led
him inside the barn, and shut the door behind them.</p>
<p class="c015">She piled up hay over herself and him and laid their
cloaks above it to keep them warm. Lavrans fell a-weeping
now and again, and said somewhat—but his speech
was so broken, she could find no meaning in it. In a
little while she lifted up his head on to her lap.</p>
<p class="c015">“Dear my husband—since now so great a love is between
them, maybe ’twill all go better than we think—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans spoke by fits and starts—his mind seemed
growing clearer:</p>
<p class="c015">“See you not—he has her wholly in his power—he
that has never been man enough to rule himself.—’Twill
go hard with her before she finds courage to set herself
<span class="pageno" id="Page_330">330</span>against aught her husband wills—and should she one day
be forced to it, ’twill be bitter grief to her—my own gentle
child—</p>
<p class="c015">—“Now am I come so far I scarce can understand why
God hath laid so many and such heavy sorrows upon me—for
I have striven faithfully to do His will. Why hath
He taken our children from us, Ragnfrid, one by one—first
our sons—then little Ulvhild—and now I have given
her that I loved dearest, honourless, to an untrusty and a
witless man. Now is there none left to us but the little
one—and unwise must I deem it to take joy in her, before
I see how it will go with her—with Ramborg.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid shook like a leaf. Then the man laid his
arm about her shoulders:</p>
<p class="c015">“Lie down,” he said, “and let us sleep—” He lay for a
while with his head against his wife’s arm, sighing now
and then, but at last he fell asleep.</p>
<hr class="c016"/>
<p class="c015">It was still pitch-dark in the barn when Ragnfrid stirred—she
wondered to find that she had slept. She felt
about with her hands; Lavrans was sitting up with
knees updrawn and his arms around them.</p>
<p class="c015">“Are <i>you</i> awake already?” she asked in wonder. “Are
you cold?”</p>
<p class="c015">“No,” said he in a hoarse voice, “but I cannot go to
sleep again.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Is it Kristin you are thinking on?” asked the mother.
“Like enough ’twill go better than we think, Lavrans,” she
said again.</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, ’tis of that I was thinking,” said the man.
“Aye, aye—maid or woman, at least she is come to the
bride-bed with the man she loves. And ’twas not so with
either you or me, my poor Ragnfrid.”</p>
<p class="c015">His wife gave a deep, dull moan, and threw herself down
on her side amongst the hay. Lavrans put out a hand and
laid it on her shoulder.</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_331">331</span>“But ’twas that I <i>could</i> not,” said he, with passion
and pain. “No, I <i>could</i> not—be as you would have
had me—when we were young. I am not such a
one—”</p>
<p class="c015">In a while Ragnfrid said softly through her weeping:</p>
<p class="c015">“Yet ’twas well with us in our life together—Lavrans—was
it not?—all these years?”</p>
<p class="c015">“So thought I myself,” answered he gloomily.</p>
<p class="c015">Thoughts crowded and tossed to and fro within him.
That single unveiled glance in which the hearts of bridegroom
and bride had leapt together—the two young faces
flushing up redly—to him it seemed a very shamelessness.
It had been agony, a scorching pain to him, that this was
his daughter. But the sight of those eyes would not leave
him—and wildly and blindly he strove against the tearing
away of the veil from something in his own heart, something
that he had never owned was there, that he had
guarded against his own wife when she sought for it.</p>
<p class="c015">’Twas that he <i>could</i> not, he said again stubbornly to
himself. In the devil’s name—he had been married off as
a boy; he had not chosen for himself; she was older than
he—he had not desired her; he had had no will to learn
this of her—to love. He grew hot with shame even now
when he thought of it—that she would have had him love
her, when he had no will to have such love from her.
That she had proffered him all this that he had never
prayed for.</p>
<p class="c015">He had been a good husband to her—so he had ever
thought. He had shown her all the honour he could, given
her full power in her own affairs, and asked her counsel
in all things; he had been true to her—and they had had
six children together. All he had asked had been that he
might live with her, without her for ever grasping at this
thing in his heart that he would not lay bare—</p>
<p class="c015">To none had he ever borne love—Ingunn, Karl Steinsön’s
wife, at Bru? Lavrans flushed red in the pitch darkness.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_332">332</span>He had been their guest ever, as often as he journeyed
down the Dale. He could not call to mind that he
had spoken with the housewife <i>once</i> alone. But when he
saw her—if he but thought of her, a sense came over him
as of the first breath of the plough-lands in the spring,
when the snows are but now melted and gone. He knew it
now—it might have befallen him too—he, too, could have
loved.</p>
<p class="c015">But he had been wedded so young, and he had grown shy
of love. And so had it come about that he throve best
in the wild woods—or out on the waste uplands—where
all things that live must have wide spaces around them—room
to flee through—fearfully they look on any stranger
that would steal upon them—</p>
<p class="c015">One time in the year there was, when all the beasts in
the woods and on the mountains forgot their shyness—when
they rushed to their mates. But his had been given
him unsought. And she had proffered him all he had not
wooed her for.</p>
<p class="c015">But the young ones in the nest—they had been the little
warm green spot in the wilderness—the inmost, sweetest
joy of his life. Those little girl-heads under his hand—</p>
<p class="c015">Marriage—they had wedded him, almost unasked.
Friends—he had many, and he had none. War—it had
brought him gladness, but there had been no more war—his
armour hung there in the loft-room, little used. He
had turned farmer—But he had had his daughters—all
his living and striving had grown dear to him, because by
it he cherished them and made them safe, those soft, tender
little beings he had held in his hands. He remembered
Kristin’s little two-year-old body on his shoulder, her
flaxen, silky hair against his cheek; her small hands holding
to his belt, while she butted her round, hard child’s
forehead against his shoulder-blades, when he rode out
with her behind him on his horse.</p>
<p class="c015">And now had she that same glow in her eyes—and she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_333">333</span>had won what was hers. She sat there in the half-shadow
against the silken pillows of the bed. In the candle-light
she was all golden—golden crown and golden shift and
golden hair spread over the naked golden arms. Her eyes
were shy no longer—</p>
<p class="c015">Her father winced with shame.</p>
<p class="c015">And yet it was as though his heart was bleeding within
him, for what he himself had never won; and for his wife,
there by his side, whom he had never given what should
have been hers.</p>
<p class="c015">Weak with pity, he felt in the darkness for Ragnfrid’s
hand:</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye, methought it was well with us in our life together,”
he said. “Methought ’twas but that you sorrowed
for our children—aye, and that you were born heavy of
mood. Never did it come to my mind, it might be that I
was no good husband to you—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid trembled fitfully:</p>
<p class="c015">“You were ever a good husband, Lavrans.”</p>
<p class="c015">“Hm,” Lavrans sat with his chin resting on his knees.
“Yet had it mayhap been better with you, if you had been
wedded even as our daughter was to-day—”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid started up with a low, piercing cry:</p>
<p class="c015">“You know! How did you know it—how long have
you known—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I know not what ’tis you speak of,” said Lavrans after
a while in a strange deadened voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“This do I speak of—that I was no maid, when I came to
be your wife,” said Ragnfrid, and her voice rang clear in
her despair.</p>
<p class="c015">In a little while Lavrans answered, as before:</p>
<p class="c015">“That have I never known, till now.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid laid her down among the hay, shaken with
weeping. When the fit was over she lifted her head a little.
A faint grey light was beginning to creep in through the
window-hole in the wall. She could dimly see her husband
<span class="pageno" id="Page_334">334</span>sitting with his arms thrown round his knees, motionless
as stone.</p>
<p class="c015">“Lavrans—speak to me—” she wailed.</p>
<p class="c015">“What would you I should say?” asked he without stirring.</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh—I know not—curse me—strike me—”</p>
<p class="c015">“’Twould be something late now,” answered the man;
there seemed to be the shade of a scornful smile in his
voice.</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid wept again: “Aye—I heeded not then that I
was betraying you. So betrayed and so dishonoured, methought,
had I been myself. There was none had spared
me. They came and brought you—you know yourself, I
saw you but three times before we were wed—Methought
you were but a boy, white and red—so young and childish—”</p>
<p class="c015">“I was so,” said Lavrans, and a faint ring of life came
to his voice. “And therefore a man might deem that you,
who were a woman—you might have been more afraid to—to
deceive one who was so young that he knew naught—”</p>
<p class="c015">“So did <i>I</i> think after,” said Ragnfrid, weeping. “When
I had come to know you. Soon came the time, when I
would have given my soul twenty times over, to be guiltless
of sin against you.”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat silent and motionless; then said his wife:</p>
<p class="c015">“You ask not anything?”</p>
<p class="c015">“What use to ask? It was he that—we met his burial-train
at Feginsbrekka, as we bore Ulvhild in to Nidaros—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” said Ragnfrid. “We had to leave the way—go
aside into a meadow. I saw them bear him on his bier—with
priests and monks and armed yeomen. I heard he
had made a good end—had made his peace with God. I
prayed as we stood there with Ulvhild’s litter between us—I
prayed that my sin and my sorrow might be laid at his
feet on the Last Day—”</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_335">335</span>“Aye, like enough you did,” said Lavrans, and there was
the same shade of scorn in his quiet voice.</p>
<p class="c015">“You know not all,” said Ragnfrid, cold with despair.
“Mind you that he came out to us at Skog the first winter
we were wedded—?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Aye,” answered the man.</p>
<p class="c015">“When Björgulf was born—oh, I thought he was dearer
spared me—He was drunk when he did it—afterward
he said he had never cared for me, he would not have me—bade
me forget it. My father knew it not; <i>he</i> did not betray
you—never think that. But Trond—we were the dearest
of friends to each other then—I made my moan to him.
He tried to force the man to wed me; but he was but a boy;
he was beaten—Afterwards he counselled me to hold
my peace, and to take you—”</p>
<p class="c015">She sat a while in silence.</p>
<p class="c015">“Then <i>he</i> came out to Skog—a year was gone by; I
thought not on it so much any more. But he came out
thither—he said that he repented, he would have had me
now, had I been unwedded—he loved me. He said so.
God knows if he said true. When he was gone—I dared
not go out on the fjord, dared not for my sin, not with the
child. And I had begun—I had begun to love you so!”
She cried out, a single cry of the wildest pain. The man
turned his head quickly towards her.</p>
<p class="c015">“When Björgulf was dying—Oh, no one, no one had
to me than my life. When he lay in the death-throes—I
thought, if he died, I must die too. But I prayed <i>not</i>
God to spare my boy’s life—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans sat a long time silent—then he asked in a dead,
heavy voice:</p>
<p class="c015">“Was it because I was not his father?”</p>
<p class="c015">“I knew not if you were,” said Ragnfrid, growing stiff
and stark where she sat.</p>
<p class="c015">Long they sat there in a deathly stillness. Then the
man asked vehemently of a sudden:</p>
<p class="c015"><span class="pageno" id="Page_336">336</span>“In Jesus name, Ragnfrid—why tell you me all this—now?”</p>
<p class="c015">“Oh, I know not!” She wrung her hands till the joints
cracked. “That you may avenge you on me—drive me
from your house—”</p>
<p class="c015">“Think you that would help me—” His voice shook with
scorn. “Then there are our daughters,” he said quietly.
“Kristin—and the little one.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid sat still a while.</p>
<p class="c015">“I mind me how you judged of Erlend Nikulaussön,”
she said softly. “How judge you of me, then—?”</p>
<p class="c015">A long shudder of cold passed over the man’s body—yet
a little of the stiffness seemed to leave him.</p>
<p class="c015">“You have—we have lived together now for seven and
twenty years—almost. ’Tis not the same as with a stranger.
I see this too—worse than misery has it been for you.”</p>
<p class="c015">Ragnfrid sank together sobbing at the words. She
plucked up heart to put her hand on one of his. He
moved not at all—sat as still as a dead man. Her weeping
grew louder and louder—but her husband still sat
motionless, looking at the faint grey light creeping in
around the door. At last she lay as if all her tears were
spent. Then he stroked her arm lightly downward—and
she fell to weeping again.</p>
<p class="c015">“Mind you,” she said through her tears, “that man who
came to us one time, when we dwelt at Skog? He that
knew all the ancient lays? Mind you the lay of a dead
man that was come back from the world of torment,
and told his son the story of all that he had seen? There
was heard a groaning from Hell’s deepest ground, the
querns of untrue women grinding mould for their husbands’
meat. Bloody were the stones they dragged at—bloody
hung the hearts from out their breasts—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans was silent.</p>
<p class="c015">“All these years have I thought upon those words,” said
<span class="pageno" id="Page_337">337</span>Ragnfrid. “Every day ’twas as though my heart was
bleeding, for every day methought I ground you mould
for meat—”</p>
<p class="c015">Lavrans know not himself why he answered as he did.
It seemed to him his breast was empty and hollow, like the
breast of a man that has had the blood-eagle carven through
his back. But he laid his hand heavily and wearily on
his wife’s head, and spoke:</p>
<p class="c015">“Mayhap mould must needs be ground, my Ragnfrid, before
the meat can grow.”</p>
<p class="c015">When she tried to take his hand and kiss it, he snatched
it away. But then he looked down at his wife, took one
of her hands and laid it on his knee, and bowed his cold,
stiffened face down upon it. And so they sat on, motionless,
speaking no word more.</p>
